A Midsummer Night's Dream
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/a-midsummer-nights-dream/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
Four lovers:
  HERMIA
  LYSANDER
  HELENA
  DEMETRIUS
THESEUS, duke of Athens
HIPPOLYTA, queen of the Amazons
EGEUS, father to Hermia
PHILOSTRATE, master of the revels to Theseus
NICK BOTTOM, weaver
PETER QUINCE, carpenter
FRANCIS FLUTE, bellows-mender
TOM SNOUT, tinker
SNUG, joiner
ROBIN STARVELING, tailor
OBERON, king of the Fairies
TITANIA, queen of the Fairies
ROBIN GOODFELLOW, a "puck," or hobgoblin, in Oberon's service
A FAIRY, in the service of Titania
Fairies attending upon Titania:
  PEASEBLOSSOM
  COBWEB
  MOTE
  MUSTARDSEED
Lords and Attendants on Theseus and Hippolyta
Other Fairies in the trains of Titania and Oberon


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, and Philostrate, with others.]


THESEUS
Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour
Draws on apace. Four happy days bring in
Another moon. But, O, methinks how slow
This old moon wanes! She lingers my desires
Like to a stepdame or a dowager
Long withering out a young man's revenue.

HIPPOLYTA
Four days will quickly steep themselves in night;
Four nights will quickly dream away the time;
And then the moon, like to a silver bow
New-bent in heaven, shall behold the night
Of our solemnities.

THESEUS  Go, Philostrate,
Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments.
Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth.
Turn melancholy forth to funerals;
The pale companion is not for our pomp.
[Philostrate exits.]
Hippolyta, I wooed thee with my sword
And won thy love doing thee injuries,
But I will wed thee in another key,
With pomp, with triumph, and with reveling.

[Enter Egeus and his daughter Hermia, and Lysander 
 and Demetrius.]


EGEUS
Happy be Theseus, our renowned duke!

THESEUS
Thanks, good Egeus. What's the news with thee?

EGEUS
Full of vexation come I, with complaint
Against my child, my daughter Hermia.--
Stand forth, Demetrius.--My noble lord,
This man hath my consent to marry her.--
Stand forth, Lysander.--And, my gracious duke,
This man hath bewitched the bosom of my child.--
Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes
And interchanged love tokens with my child.
Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung
With feigning voice verses of feigning love
And stol'n the impression of her fantasy
With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits,
Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats--messengers
Of strong prevailment in unhardened youth.
With cunning hast thou filched my daughter's heart,
Turned her obedience (which is due to me)
To stubborn harshness.--And, my gracious duke,
Be it so she will not here before your Grace
Consent to marry with Demetrius,
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens:
As she is mine, I may dispose of her,
Which shall be either to this gentleman
Or to her death, according to our law
Immediately provided in that case.

THESEUS
What say you, Hermia? Be advised, fair maid.
To you, your father should be as a god,
One that composed your beauties, yea, and one
To whom you are but as a form in wax
By him imprinted, and within his power
To leave the figure or disfigure it.
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.

HERMIA
So is Lysander.

THESEUS  In himself he is,
But in this kind, wanting your father's voice,
The other must be held the worthier.

HERMIA
I would my father looked but with my eyes.

THESEUS
Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.

HERMIA
I do entreat your Grace to pardon me.
I know not by what power I am made bold,
Nor how it may concern my modesty
In such a presence here to plead my thoughts;
But I beseech your Grace that I may know
The worst that may befall me in this case
If I refuse to wed Demetrius.

THESEUS
Either to die the death or to abjure
Forever the society of men.
Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires,
Know of your youth, examine well your blood,
Whether (if you yield not to your father's choice)
You can endure the livery of a nun,
For aye to be in shady cloister mewed,
To live a barren sister all your life,
Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.
Thrice-blessed they that master so their blood
To undergo such maiden pilgrimage,
But earthlier happy is the rose distilled
Than that which, withering on the virgin thorn,
Grows, lives, and dies in single blessedness.

HERMIA
So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,
Ere I will yield my virgin patent up
Unto his Lordship whose unwished yoke
My soul consents not to give sovereignty.

THESEUS
Take time to pause, and by the next new moon
(The sealing day betwixt my love and me
For everlasting bond of fellowship),
Upon that day either prepare to die
For disobedience to your father's will,
Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would,
Or on Diana's altar to protest
For aye austerity and single life.

DEMETRIUS
Relent, sweet Hermia, and, Lysander, yield
Thy crazed title to my certain right.

LYSANDER
You have her father's love, Demetrius.
Let me have Hermia's. Do you marry him.

EGEUS
Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love;
And what is mine my love shall render him.
And she is mine, and all my right of her
I do estate unto Demetrius.

LYSANDER, [to Theseus]
I am, my lord, as well derived as he,
As well possessed. My love is more than his;
My fortunes every way as fairly ranked
(If not with vantage) as Demetrius';
And (which is more than all these boasts can be)
I am beloved of beauteous Hermia.
Why should not I then prosecute my right?
Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head,
Made love to Nedar's daughter, Helena,
And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes,
Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,
Upon this spotted and inconstant man.

THESEUS
I must confess that I have heard so much,
And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof;
But, being overfull of self-affairs,
My mind did lose it.--But, Demetrius, come,
And come, Egeus; you shall go with me.
I have some private schooling for you both.--
For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself
To fit your fancies to your father's will,
Or else the law of Athens yields you up
(Which by no means we may extenuate)
To death or to a vow of single life.--
Come, my Hippolyta. What cheer, my love?--
Demetrius and Egeus, go along.
I must employ you in some business
Against our nuptial and confer with you
Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.

EGEUS
With duty and desire we follow you.
[All but Hermia and Lysander exit.]

LYSANDER
How now, my love? Why is your cheek so pale?
How chance the roses there do fade so fast?

HERMIA
Belike for want of rain, which I could well
Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.

LYSANDER
Ay me! For aught that I could ever read,
Could ever hear by tale or history,
The course of true love never did run smooth.
But either it was different in blood--

HERMIA
O cross! Too high to be enthralled to low.

LYSANDER
Or else misgraffed in respect of years--

HERMIA
O spite! Too old to be engaged to young.

LYSANDER
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends--

HERMIA
O hell, to choose love by another's eyes!

LYSANDER
Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,
War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it,
Making it momentany as a sound,
Swift as a shadow, short as any dream,
Brief as the lightning in the collied night,
That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and Earth,
And, ere a man hath power to say "Behold!"
The jaws of darkness do devour it up.
So quick bright things come to confusion.

HERMIA
If then true lovers have been ever crossed,
It stands as an edict in destiny.
Then let us teach our trial patience
Because it is a customary cross,
As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,
Wishes and tears, poor fancy's followers.

LYSANDER
A good persuasion. Therefore, hear me, Hermia:
I have a widow aunt, a dowager
Of great revenue, and she hath no child.
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues,
And she respects me as her only son.
There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee;
And to that place the sharp Athenian law
Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me, then
Steal forth thy father's house tomorrow night,
And in the wood a league without the town
(Where I did meet thee once with Helena
To do observance to a morn of May),
There will I stay for thee.

HERMIA  My good Lysander,
I swear to thee by Cupid's strongest bow,
By his best arrow with the golden head,
By the simplicity of Venus' doves,
By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,
And by that fire which burned the Carthage queen
When the false Trojan under sail was seen,
By all the vows that ever men have broke
(In number more than ever women spoke),
In that same place thou hast appointed me,
Tomorrow truly will I meet with thee.

LYSANDER
Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.

[Enter Helena.]


HERMIA
Godspeed, fair Helena. Whither away?

HELENA
Call you me "fair"? That "fair" again unsay.
Demetrius loves your fair. O happy fair!
Your eyes are lodestars and your tongue's sweet air
More tunable than lark to shepherd's ear
When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.
Sickness is catching. O, were favor so!
Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go.
My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye;
My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet
melody.
Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,
The rest I'd give to be to you translated.
O, teach me how you look and with what art
You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart!

HERMIA
I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.

HELENA
O, that your frowns would teach my smiles such
skill!

HERMIA
I give him curses, yet he gives me love.

HELENA
O, that my prayers could such affection move!

HERMIA
The more I hate, the more he follows me.

HELENA
The more I love, the more he hateth me.

HERMIA
His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.

HELENA
None but your beauty. Would that fault were mine!

HERMIA
Take comfort: he no more shall see my face.
Lysander and myself will fly this place.
Before the time I did Lysander see
Seemed Athens as a paradise to me.
O, then, what graces in my love do dwell
That he hath turned a heaven unto a hell!

LYSANDER
Helen, to you our minds we will unfold.
Tomorrow night when Phoebe doth behold
Her silver visage in the wat'ry glass,
Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass
(A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal),
Through Athens' gates have we devised to steal.

HERMIA
And in the wood where often you and I
Upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie,
Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
There my Lysander and myself shall meet
And thence from Athens turn away our eyes
To seek new friends and stranger companies.
Farewell, sweet playfellow. Pray thou for us,
And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius.--
Keep word, Lysander. We must starve our sight
From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.

LYSANDER
I will, my Hermia.	[Hermia exits.]
Helena, adieu.
As you on him, Demetrius dote on you!
[Lysander exits.]

HELENA
How happy some o'er other some can be!
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.
But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so.
He will not know what all but he do know.
And, as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes,
So I, admiring of his qualities.
Things base and vile, holding no quantity,
Love can transpose to form and dignity.
Love looks not with the eyes but with the mind;
And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind.
Nor hath Love's mind of any judgment taste.
Wings, and no eyes, figure unheedy haste.
And therefore is Love said to be a child
Because in choice he is so oft beguiled.
As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,
So the boy Love is perjured everywhere.
For, ere Demetrius looked on Hermia's eyne,
He hailed down oaths that he was only mine;
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,
So he dissolved, and show'rs of oaths did melt.
I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight.
Then to the wood will he tomorrow night
Pursue her. And, for this intelligence
If I have thanks, it is a dear expense.
But herein mean I to enrich my pain,
To have his sight thither and back again.
[She exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Quince the carpenter, and Snug the joiner, and
Bottom the weaver, and Flute the bellows-mender, and
Snout the tinker, and Starveling the tailor.]


QUINCE  Is all our company here?

BOTTOM  You were best to call them generally, man by
man, according to the scrip.

QUINCE  Here is the scroll of every man's name which
is thought fit, through all Athens, to play in our
interlude before the Duke and the Duchess on his
wedding day at night.

BOTTOM  First, good Peter Quince, say what the play
treats on, then read the names of the actors, and so
grow to a point.

QUINCE  Marry, our play is "The most lamentable
comedy and most cruel death of Pyramus and
Thisbe."

BOTTOM  A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a
merry. Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your
actors by the scroll. Masters, spread yourselves.

QUINCE  Answer as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver.

BOTTOM  Ready. Name what part I am for, and
proceed.

QUINCE  You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.

BOTTOM  What is Pyramus--a lover or a tyrant?

QUINCE  A lover that kills himself most gallant for love.

BOTTOM  That will ask some tears in the true performing
of it. If I do it, let the audience look to their
eyes. I will move storms; I will condole in some
measure. To the rest.--Yet my chief humor is for a
tyrant. I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a
cat in, to make all split:

	The raging rocks
	And shivering shocks
	Shall break the locks
	   Of prison gates.
	And Phibbus' car
	Shall shine from far
	And make and mar
	   The foolish Fates.

This was lofty. Now name the rest of the players.
This is Ercles' vein, a tyrant's vein. A lover is more
condoling.

QUINCE  Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.

FLUTE  Here, Peter Quince.

QUINCE  Flute, you must take Thisbe on you.

FLUTE  What is Thisbe--a wand'ring knight?

QUINCE  It is the lady that Pyramus must love.

FLUTE  Nay, faith, let not me play a woman. I have a
beard coming.

QUINCE  That's all one. You shall play it in a mask, and
you may speak as small as you will.

BOTTOM  An I may hide my face, let me play Thisbe too.
I'll speak in a monstrous little voice: "Thisne,
Thisne!"--"Ah Pyramus, my lover dear! Thy Thisbe
dear and lady dear!"

QUINCE  No, no, you must play Pyramus--and, Flute,
you Thisbe.

BOTTOM  Well, proceed.

QUINCE  Robin Starveling, the tailor.

STARVELING  Here, Peter Quince.

QUINCE  Robin Starveling, you must play Thisbe's
mother.--Tom Snout, the tinker.

SNOUT  Here, Peter Quince.

QUINCE  You, Pyramus' father.--Myself, Thisbe's
father.--Snug the joiner, you the lion's part.--
And I hope here is a play fitted.

SNUG  Have you the lion's part written? Pray you, if it
be, give it me, for I am slow of study.

QUINCE  You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but
roaring.

BOTTOM  Let me play the lion too. I will roar that I will
do any man's heart good to hear me. I will roar that
I will make the Duke say "Let him roar again. Let
him roar again!"

QUINCE  An you should do it too terribly, you would
fright the Duchess and the ladies that they would
shriek, and that were enough to hang us all.

ALL  That would hang us, every mother's son.

BOTTOM  I grant you, friends, if you should fright the
ladies out of their wits, they would have no more
discretion but to hang us. But I will aggravate my
voice so that I will roar you as gently as any sucking
dove. I will roar you an 'twere any nightingale.

QUINCE  You can play no part but Pyramus, for Pyramus
is a sweet-faced man, a proper man as one
shall see in a summer's day, a most lovely gentlemanlike
man. Therefore you must needs play 
Pyramus.

BOTTOM  Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I
best to play it in?

QUINCE  Why, what you will.

BOTTOM  I will discharge it in either your straw-color
beard, your orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain
beard, or your French-crown-color beard,
your perfit yellow.

QUINCE  Some of your French crowns have no hair at
all, and then you will play barefaced. But, masters,
here are your parts, [giving out the parts,] and I am
to entreat you, request you, and desire you to con
them by tomorrow night and meet me in the palace
wood, a mile without the town, by moonlight. There
will we rehearse, for if we meet in the city, we shall
be dogged with company and our devices known. In
the meantime I will draw a bill of properties such as
our play wants. I pray you fail me not.

BOTTOM  We will meet, and there we may rehearse
most obscenely and courageously. Take pains. Be
perfit. Adieu.

QUINCE  At the Duke's Oak we meet.

BOTTOM  Enough. Hold or cut bowstrings.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter a Fairy at one door and Robin Goodfellow at
another.]


ROBIN
How now, spirit? Whither wander you?

FAIRY
	Over hill, over dale,
	   Thorough bush, thorough brier,
	Over park, over pale,
	   Thorough flood, thorough fire;
	I do wander everywhere,
	Swifter than the moon's sphere.
	And I serve the Fairy Queen,
	To dew her orbs upon the green.
	The cowslips tall her pensioners be;
	In their gold coats spots you see;
	Those be rubies, fairy favors;
	In those freckles live their savors.
I must go seek some dewdrops here
And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear.
Farewell, thou lob of spirits. I'll be gone.
Our queen and all her elves come here anon.

ROBIN
The King doth keep his revels here tonight.
Take heed the Queen come not within his sight,
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath
Because that she, as her attendant, hath
A lovely boy stolen from an Indian king;
She never had so sweet a changeling.
And jealous Oberon would have the child
Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild.
But she perforce withholds the loved boy,
Crowns him with flowers and makes him all her
joy.
And now they never meet in grove or green,
By fountain clear or spangled starlight sheen,
But they do square, that all their elves for fear
Creep into acorn cups and hide them there.

FAIRY
Either I mistake your shape and making quite,
Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite
Called Robin Goodfellow. Are not you he
That frights the maidens of the villagery,
Skim milk, and sometimes labor in the quern
And bootless make the breathless huswife churn,
And sometime make the drink to bear no barm,
Mislead night wanderers, laughing at their harm?
Those that "Hobgoblin" call you and "sweet Puck,"
You do their work, and they shall have good luck.
Are not you he?

ROBIN  Thou speakest aright.
I am that merry wanderer of the night.
I jest to Oberon and make him smile
When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,
Neighing in likeness of a filly foal.
And sometime lurk I in a gossip's bowl
In very likeness of a roasted crab,
And, when she drinks, against her lips I bob
And on her withered dewlap pour the ale.
The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,
Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me;
Then slip I from her bum, down topples she
And "Tailor!" cries and falls into a cough,
And then the whole choir hold their hips and loffe
And waxen in their mirth and neeze and swear
A merrier hour was never wasted there.
But room, fairy. Here comes Oberon.

FAIRY
And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!

[Enter Oberon the King of Fairies at one door, with his
train, and Titania the Queen at another, with hers.]


OBERON
Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.

TITANIA
What, jealous Oberon? Fairies, skip hence.
I have forsworn his bed and company.

OBERON
Tarry, rash wanton. Am not I thy lord?

TITANIA
Then I must be thy lady. But I know
When thou hast stolen away from Fairyland
And in the shape of Corin sat all day
Playing on pipes of corn and versing love
To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here,
Come from the farthest steep of India,
But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,
Your buskined mistress and your warrior love,
To Theseus must be wedded, and you come
To give their bed joy and prosperity?

OBERON
How canst thou thus for shame, Titania,
Glance at my credit with Hippolyta,
Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?
Didst not thou lead him through the glimmering
night
From Perigouna, whom he ravished,
And make him with fair Aegles break his faith,
With Ariadne and Antiopa?

TITANIA
These are the forgeries of jealousy;
And never, since the middle summer's spring,
Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead,
By paved fountain or by rushy brook,
Or in the beached margent of the sea,
To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,
But with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our sport.
Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,
As in revenge have sucked up from the sea
Contagious fogs, which, falling in the land,
Hath every pelting river made so proud
That they have overborne their continents.
The ox hath therefore stretched his yoke in vain,
The plowman lost his sweat, and the green corn
Hath rotted ere his youth attained a beard.
The fold stands empty in the drowned field,
And crows are fatted with the murrain flock.
The nine-men's-morris is filled up with mud,
And the quaint mazes in the wanton green,
For lack of tread, are undistinguishable.
The human mortals want their winter here.
No night is now with hymn or carol blessed.
Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,
Pale in her anger, washes all the air,
That rheumatic diseases do abound.
And thorough this distemperature we see
The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts
Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose,
And on old Hiems' thin and icy crown
An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds
Is, as in mockery, set. The spring, the summer,
The childing autumn, angry winter, change
Their wonted liveries, and the mazed world
By their increase now knows not which is which.
And this same progeny of evils comes
From our debate, from our dissension;
We are their parents and original.

OBERON
Do you amend it, then. It lies in you.
Why should Titania cross her Oberon?
I do but beg a little changeling boy
To be my henchman.

TITANIA  Set your heart at rest:
The Fairyland buys not the child of me.
His mother was a vot'ress of my order,
And in the spiced Indian air by night
Full often hath she gossiped by my side
And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands,
Marking th' embarked traders on the flood,
When we have laughed to see the sails conceive
And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind;
Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait,
Following (her womb then rich with my young
squire),
Would imitate and sail upon the land
To fetch me trifles and return again,
As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.
But she, being mortal, of that boy did die,
And for her sake do I rear up her boy,
And for her sake I will not part with him.

OBERON
How long within this wood intend you stay?

TITANIA
Perchance till after Theseus' wedding day.
If you will patiently dance in our round
And see our moonlight revels, go with us.
If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.

OBERON
Give me that boy and I will go with thee.

TITANIA
Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away.
We shall chide downright if I longer stay.
[Titania and her fairies exit.]

OBERON
Well, go thy way. Thou shalt not from this grove
Till I torment thee for this injury.--
My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememb'rest
Since once I sat upon a promontory
And heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back
Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath
That the rude sea grew civil at her song
And certain stars shot madly from their spheres
To hear the sea-maid's music.

ROBIN  I remember.

OBERON
That very time I saw (but thou couldst not),
Flying between the cold moon and the Earth,
Cupid all armed. A certain aim he took
At a fair vestal throned by the west,
And loosed his love-shaft smartly from his bow
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts.
But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft
Quenched in the chaste beams of the wat'ry moon,
And the imperial vot'ress passed on
In maiden meditation, fancy-free.
Yet marked I where the bolt of Cupid fell.
It fell upon a little western flower,
Before, milk-white, now purple with love's wound,
And maidens call it "love-in-idleness."
Fetch me that flower; the herb I showed thee once.
The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid
Will make or man or woman madly dote
Upon the next live creature that it sees.
Fetch me this herb, and be thou here again
Ere the leviathan can swim a league.

ROBIN
I'll put a girdle round about the Earth
In forty minutes.	[He exits.]

OBERON  Having once this juice,
I'll watch Titania when she is asleep
And drop the liquor of it in her eyes.
The next thing then she, waking, looks upon
(Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,
On meddling monkey, or on busy ape)
She shall pursue it with the soul of love.
And ere I take this charm from off her sight
(As I can take it with another herb),
I'll make her render up her page to me.
But who comes here? I am invisible,
And I will overhear their conference.

[Enter Demetrius, Helena following him.]


DEMETRIUS
I love thee not; therefore pursue me not.
Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?
The one I'll stay; the other stayeth me.
Thou told'st me they were stol'n unto this wood,
And here am I, and wood within this wood
Because I cannot meet my Hermia.
Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.

HELENA
You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant!
But yet you draw not iron, for my heart
Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw,
And I shall have no power to follow you.

DEMETRIUS
Do I entice you? Do I speak you fair?
Or rather do I not in plainest truth
Tell you I do not, nor I cannot love you?

HELENA
And even for that do I love you the more.
I am your spaniel, and, Demetrius,
The more you beat me I will fawn on you.
Use me but as your spaniel: spurn me, strike me,
Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave
(Unworthy as I am) to follow you.
What worser place can I beg in your love
(And yet a place of high respect with me)
Than to be used as you use your dog?

DEMETRIUS
Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit,
For I am sick when I do look on thee.

HELENA
And I am sick when I look not on you.

DEMETRIUS
You do impeach your modesty too much
To leave the city and commit yourself
Into the hands of one that loves you not,
To trust the opportunity of night
And the ill counsel of a desert place
With the rich worth of your virginity.

HELENA
Your virtue is my privilege. For that
It is not night when I do see your face,
Therefore I think I am not in the night.
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,
For you, in my respect, are all the world.
Then, how can it be said I am alone
When all the world is here to look on me?

DEMETRIUS
I'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes
And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.

HELENA
The wildest hath not such a heart as you.
Run when you will. The story shall be changed:
Apollo flies and Daphne holds the chase;
The dove pursues the griffin; the mild hind
Makes speed to catch the tiger. Bootless speed
When cowardice pursues and valor flies!

DEMETRIUS
I will not stay thy questions. Let me go,
Or if thou follow me, do not believe
But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.

HELENA
Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,
You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius!
Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex.
We cannot fight for love as men may do.
We should be wooed and were not made to woo.
[Demetrius exits.]
I'll follow thee and make a heaven of hell
To die upon the hand I love so well.	[Helena exits.]

OBERON
Fare thee well, nymph. Ere he do leave this grove,
Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love.

[Enter Robin.]

Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.

ROBIN
Ay, there it is.

OBERON  I pray thee give it me.
[Robin gives him the flower.]
I know a bank where the wild thyme blows,
Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,
Quite overcanopied with luscious woodbine,
With sweet muskroses, and with eglantine.
There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,
Lulled in these flowers with dances and delight.
And there the snake throws her enameled skin,
Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in.
And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes
And make her full of hateful fantasies.
Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove.
[He gives Robin part of the flower.]
A sweet Athenian lady is in love
With a disdainful youth. Anoint his eyes,
But do it when the next thing he espies
May be the lady. Thou shalt know the man
By the Athenian garments he hath on.
Effect it with some care, that he may prove
More fond on her than she upon her love.
And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.

ROBIN
Fear not, my lord. Your servant shall do so.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Titania, Queen of Fairies, with her train.]


TITANIA
Come, now a roundel and a fairy song;
Then, for the third part of a minute, hence--
Some to kill cankers in the muskrose buds,
Some war with reremice for their leathern wings
To make my small elves coats, and some keep back
The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders
At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep.
Then to your offices and let me rest.	[She lies down.]

[Fairies sing.]


FIRST FAIRY
	You spotted snakes with double tongue,
	   Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen.
	Newts and blindworms, do no wrong,
	   Come not near our Fairy Queen.

CHORUS
	   Philomel, with melody
	   Sing in our sweet lullaby.
	Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby.
	   Never harm
	   Nor spell nor charm
	Come our lovely lady nigh.
	So good night, with lullaby.

FIRST FAIRY
	Weaving spiders, come not here.
	   Hence, you long-legged spinners, hence.
	Beetles black, approach not near.
	   Worm nor snail, do no offence.

CHORUS
	   Philomel, with melody
	   Sing in our sweet lullaby.
	Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby.
	   Never harm
	   Nor spell nor charm
	Come our lovely lady nigh.
	So good night, with lullaby.
[Titania sleeps.]

SECOND FAIRY
Hence, away! Now all is well.
One aloof stand sentinel.	[ Fairies exit.]

[Enter Oberon, who anoints Titania's eyelids with the
nectar.]


OBERON
	What thou seest when thou dost wake
	Do it for thy true love take.
	Love and languish for his sake.
	Be it ounce, or cat, or bear,
	Pard, or boar with bristled hair,
	In thy eye that shall appear
	When thou wak'st, it is thy dear.
	Wake when some vile thing is near.	[He exits.]

[Enter Lysander and Hermia.]


LYSANDER
Fair love, you faint with wand'ring in the wood.
   And, to speak troth, I have forgot our way.
We'll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,
   And tarry for the comfort of the day.

HERMIA
Be it so, Lysander. Find you out a bed,
For I upon this bank will rest my head.

LYSANDER
One turf shall serve as pillow for us both;
One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.

HERMIA
Nay, good Lysander. For my sake, my dear,
Lie further off yet. Do not lie so near.

LYSANDER
O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!
Love takes the meaning in love's conference.
I mean that my heart unto yours is knit,
So that but one heart we can make of it;
Two bosoms interchained with an oath--
So then two bosoms and a single troth.
Then by your side no bed-room me deny,
For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.

HERMIA
Lysander riddles very prettily.
Now much beshrew my manners and my pride
If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied.
But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy,
Lie further off in human modesty.
Such separation, as may well be said,
Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid.
So far be distant; and good night, sweet friend.
Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end!

LYSANDER
"Amen, amen" to that fair prayer, say I,
And then end life when I end loyalty!
Here is my bed. Sleep give thee all his rest!

HERMIA
With half that wish the wisher's eyes be pressed!
[They sleep.]

[Enter Robin.]


ROBIN
	Through the forest have I gone,
	But Athenian found I none
	On whose eyes I might approve
	This flower's force in stirring love.
[He sees Lysander.]
	Night and silence! Who is here?
	Weeds of Athens he doth wear.
	This is he my master said
	Despised the Athenian maid.
	And here the maiden, sleeping sound
	On the dank and dirty ground.
	Pretty soul, she durst not lie
	Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.--
	Churl, upon thy eyes I throw
	All the power this charm doth owe.
[He anoints Lysander's eyelids
with the nectar.]
	When thou wak'st, let love forbid
	Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.
	So, awake when I am gone,
	For I must now to Oberon.	[He exits.]

[Enter Demetrius and Helena, running.]


HELENA
Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.

DEMETRIUS
I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.

HELENA
O, wilt thou darkling leave me? Do not so.

DEMETRIUS
Stay, on thy peril. I alone will go.	[Demetrius exits.]

HELENA
O, I am out of breath in this fond chase.
The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace.
Happy is Hermia, wheresoe'er she lies,
For she hath blessed and attractive eyes.
How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears.
If so, my eyes are oftener washed than hers.
No, no, I am as ugly as a bear,
For beasts that meet me run away for fear.
Therefore no marvel though Demetrius
Do as a monster fly my presence thus.
What wicked and dissembling glass of mine
Made me compare with Hermia's sphery eyne?
But who is here? Lysander, on the ground!
Dead or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.--
Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.

LYSANDER, [waking up]
And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake.
Transparent Helena! Nature shows art,
That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.
Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word
Is that vile name to perish on my sword!

HELENA
Do not say so. Lysander, say not so.
What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what
though?
Yet Hermia still loves you. Then be content.

LYSANDER
Content with Hermia? No, I do repent
The tedious minutes I with her have spent.
Not Hermia, but Helena I love.
Who will not change a raven for a dove?
The will of man is by his reason swayed,
And reason says you are the worthier maid.
Things growing are not ripe until their season;
So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason.
And touching now the point of human skill,
Reason becomes the marshal to my will
And leads me to your eyes, where I o'erlook
Love's stories written in love's richest book.

HELENA
Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?
When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?
Is 't not enough, is 't not enough, young man,
That I did never, no, nor never can
Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius' eye,
But you must flout my insufficiency?
Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do,
In such disdainful manner me to woo.
But fare you well. Perforce I must confess
I thought you lord of more true gentleness.
O, that a lady of one man refused
Should of another therefore be abused!	[She exits.]

LYSANDER
She sees not Hermia.--Hermia, sleep thou there,
And never mayst thou come Lysander near.
For, as a surfeit of the sweetest things
The deepest loathing to the stomach brings,
Or as the heresies that men do leave
Are hated most of those they did deceive,
So thou, my surfeit and my heresy,
Of all be hated, but the most of me!
And, all my powers, address your love and might
To honor Helen and to be her knight.	[He exits.]

HERMIA, [waking up]
Help me, Lysander, help me! Do thy best
To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast.
Ay me, for pity! What a dream was here!
Lysander, look how I do quake with fear.
Methought a serpent ate my heart away,
And you sat smiling at his cruel prey.
Lysander! What, removed? Lysander, lord!
What, out of hearing? Gone? No sound, no word?
Alack, where are you? Speak, an if you hear.
Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.--
No? Then I well perceive you are not nigh.
Either death or you I'll find immediately.
[She exits.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[With Titania still asleep onstage, enter the Clowns,
Bottom, Quince, Snout, Starveling, Snug, and Flute.]


BOTTOM  Are we all met?

QUINCE  Pat, pat. And here's a marvels convenient
place for our rehearsal. This green plot shall be
our stage, this hawthorn brake our tiring-house,
and we will do it in action as we will do it before
the Duke.

BOTTOM  Peter Quince?

QUINCE  What sayest thou, bully Bottom?

BOTTOM  There are things in this comedy of Pyramus
and Thisbe that will never please. First, Pyramus
must draw a sword to kill himself, which the ladies
cannot abide. How answer you that?

SNOUT  By 'r lakin, a parlous fear.

STARVELING  I believe we must leave the killing out,
when all is done.

BOTTOM  Not a whit! I have a device to make all well.
Write me a prologue, and let the prologue seem to
say we will do no harm with our swords and that
Pyramus is not killed indeed. And, for the more
better assurance, tell them that I, Pyramus, am not
Pyramus, but Bottom the weaver. This will put them
out of fear.

QUINCE  Well, we will have such a prologue, and it shall
be written in eight and six.

BOTTOM  No, make it two more. Let it be written in
eight and eight.

SNOUT  Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?

STARVELING  I fear it, I promise you.

BOTTOM  Masters, you ought to consider with yourself,
to bring in (God shield us!) a lion among ladies is a
most dreadful thing. For there is not a more fearful
wildfowl than your lion living, and we ought to look
to 't.

SNOUT  Therefore another prologue must tell he is not
a lion.

BOTTOM  Nay, you must name his name, and half his
face must be seen through the lion's neck, and he
himself must speak through, saying thus, or to the
same defect: "Ladies," or "Fair ladies, I would
wish you," or "I would request you," or "I would
entreat you not to fear, not to tremble! My life for
yours. If you think I come hither as a lion, it were
pity of my life. No, I am no such thing. I am a man as
other men are." And there indeed let him name his
name and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner.

QUINCE  Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard
things: that is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber,
for you know Pyramus and Thisbe meet by
moonlight.

SNOUT  Doth the moon shine that night we play our
play?

BOTTOM  A calendar, a calendar! Look in the almanac.
Find out moonshine, find out moonshine.
[Quince takes out a book.]

QUINCE  Yes, it doth shine that night.

BOTTOM  Why, then, may you leave a casement of the
great chamber window, where we play, open, and
the moon may shine in at the casement.

QUINCE  Ay, or else one must come in with a bush of
thorns and a lantern and say he comes to disfigure
or to present the person of Moonshine. Then there
is another thing: we must have a wall in the great
chamber, for Pyramus and Thisbe, says the story,
did talk through the chink of a wall.

SNOUT  You can never bring in a wall. What say you,
Bottom?

BOTTOM  Some man or other must present Wall. And
let him have some plaster, or some loam, or some
roughcast about him to signify wall, or let him
hold his fingers thus, and through that cranny shall
Pyramus and Thisbe whisper.

QUINCE  If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down,
every mother's son, and rehearse your parts. Pyramus,
you begin. When you have spoken your
speech, enter into that brake, and so everyone
according to his cue.

[Enter Robin invisible to those onstage.]


ROBIN, [aside]
What hempen homespuns have we swagg'ring here
So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen?
What, a play toward? I'll be an auditor--
An actor too perhaps, if I see cause.

QUINCE  Speak, Pyramus.--Thisbe, stand forth.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
	Thisbe, the flowers of odious savors sweet--

QUINCE  Odors, odors!

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
		...odors savors sweet.
	So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisbe dear.--
	But hark, a voice! Stay thou but here awhile,
	And by and by I will to thee appear.	[He exits.]

ROBIN, [aside]
A stranger Pyramus than e'er played here.	[He exits.]

FLUTE  Must I speak now?

QUINCE  Ay, marry, must you, for you must understand
he goes but to see a noise that he heard and is to
come again.

FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
	Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue,
	Of color like the red rose on triumphant brier,
	Most brisky juvenal and eke most lovely Jew,
	As true as truest horse, that yet would never tire.
	I'll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny's tomb.

QUINCE  "Ninus' tomb," man! Why, you must not
speak that yet. That you answer to Pyramus. You
speak all your part at once, cues and all.--Pyramus,
enter. Your cue is past. It is "never tire."

FLUTE  O!
[As Thisbe.] As true as truest horse, that yet would never
tire.

[Enter Robin, and Bottom as Pyramus with the
ass-head.]


BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
	If I were fair, fair Thisbe, I were only thine.

QUINCE  O monstrous! O strange! We are haunted. Pray,
masters, fly, masters! Help!
[Quince, Flute, Snout, Snug, and Starveling exit.]

ROBIN
I'll follow you. I'll lead you about a round,
   Through bog, through bush, through brake,
   through brier.
Sometime a horse I'll be, sometime a hound,
   A hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire,
And neigh and bark and grunt and roar and burn,
Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.
[He exits.]

BOTTOM  Why do they run away? This is a knavery of
them to make me afeard.

[Enter Snout.]


SNOUT  O Bottom, thou art changed! What do I see on
thee?

BOTTOM  What do you see? You see an ass-head of your
own, do you?	[Snout exits.]

[Enter Quince.]


QUINCE  Bless thee, Bottom, bless thee! Thou art
translated!	[He exits.]

BOTTOM  I see their knavery. This is to make an ass of
me, to fright me, if they could. But I will not stir
from this place, do what they can. I will walk up
and down here, and I will sing, that they shall hear
I am not afraid.
[He sings.]	The ouzel cock, so black of hue,
	   With orange-tawny bill,
	The throstle with his note so true,
	   The wren with little quill--

TITANIA, [waking up]
What angel wakes me from my flow'ry bed?

BOTTOM [sings]
	The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,
	   The plainsong cuckoo gray,
	Whose note full many a man doth mark
	   And dares not answer "nay"--
for, indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a
bird? Who would give a bird the lie though he cry
"cuckoo" never so?

TITANIA
I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again.
Mine ear is much enamored of thy note,
So is mine eye enthralled to thy shape,
And thy fair virtue's force perforce doth move me
On the first view to say, to swear, I love thee.

BOTTOM  Methinks, mistress, you should have little
reason for that. And yet, to say the truth, reason
and love keep little company together nowadays.
The more the pity that some honest neighbors will
not make them friends. Nay, I can gleek upon
occasion.

TITANIA
Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.

BOTTOM  Not so neither; but if I had wit enough to get
out of this wood, I have enough to serve mine own
turn.

TITANIA
Out of this wood do not desire to go.
Thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no.
I am a spirit of no common rate.
The summer still doth tend upon my state,
And I do love thee. Therefore go with me.
I'll give thee fairies to attend on thee,
And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep
And sing while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep.
And I will purge thy mortal grossness so
That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.--
Peaseblossom, Cobweb, Mote, and Mustardseed!

[Enter four Fairies: Peaseblossom, Cobweb,
Mote, and Mustardseed.]


PEASEBLOSSOM  Ready.

COBWEB  And I.

MOTE  And I.

MUSTARDSEED  And I.

ALL  Where shall we go?

TITANIA
Be kind and courteous to this gentleman.
Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes;
Feed him with apricocks and dewberries,
With purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries;
The honey-bags steal from the humble-bees,
And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs
And light them at the fiery glowworms' eyes
To have my love to bed and to arise;
And pluck the wings from painted butterflies
To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes.
Nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.

PEASEBLOSSOM  Hail, mortal!

COBWEB  Hail!

MOTE  Hail!

MUSTARDSEED  Hail!

BOTTOM  I cry your Worships mercy, heartily.--I beseech
your Worship's name.

COBWEB  Cobweb.

BOTTOM  I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good
Master Cobweb. If I cut my finger, I shall make
bold with you.--Your name, honest gentleman?

PEASEBLOSSOM  Peaseblossom.

BOTTOM  I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash,
your mother, and to Master Peascod, your father.
Good Master Peaseblossom, I shall desire you of
more acquaintance too.--Your name, I beseech
you, sir?

MUSTARDSEED  Mustardseed.

BOTTOM  Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience
well. That same cowardly, giantlike ox-beef
hath devoured many a gentleman of your house. I
promise you, your kindred hath made my eyes
water ere now. I desire you of more acquaintance,
good Master Mustardseed.

TITANIA
Come, wait upon him. Lead him to my bower.
   The moon, methinks, looks with a wat'ry eye,
And when she weeps, weeps every little flower,
   Lamenting some enforced chastity.
Tie up my lover's tongue. Bring him silently.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Oberon, King of Fairies.]


OBERON
I wonder if Titania be awaked;
Then what it was that next came in her eye,
Which she must dote on in extremity.

[Enter Robin Goodfellow.]

Here comes my messenger. How now, mad spirit?
What night-rule now about this haunted grove?

ROBIN
My mistress with a monster is in love.
Near to her close and consecrated bower,
While she was in her dull and sleeping hour,
A crew of patches, rude mechanicals,
That work for bread upon Athenian stalls,
Were met together to rehearse a play
Intended for great Theseus' nuptial day.
The shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort,
Who Pyramus presented in their sport,
Forsook his scene and entered in a brake.
When I did him at this advantage take,
An ass's noll I fixed on his head.
Anon his Thisbe must be answered,
And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy,
As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye,
Or russet-pated choughs, many in sort,
Rising and cawing at the gun's report,
Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky,
So at his sight away his fellows fly,
And, at our stamp, here o'er and o'er one falls.
He "Murder" cries and help from Athens calls.
Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus
strong,
Made senseless things begin to do them wrong;
For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch,
Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things
catch.
I led them on in this distracted fear
And left sweet Pyramus translated there.
When in that moment, so it came to pass,
Titania waked and straightway loved an ass.

OBERON
This falls out better than I could devise.
But hast thou yet latched the Athenian's eyes
With the love juice, as I did bid thee do?

ROBIN
I took him sleeping--that is finished, too--
And the Athenian woman by his side,
That, when he waked, of force she must be eyed.

[Enter Demetrius and Hermia.]


OBERON
Stand close. This is the same Athenian.

ROBIN
This is the woman, but not this the man.
[They step aside.]

DEMETRIUS
O, why rebuke you him that loves you so?
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe!

HERMIA
Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse,
For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse.
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep,
Being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep
And kill me too.
The sun was not so true unto the day
As he to me. Would he have stolen away
From sleeping Hermia? I'll believe as soon
This whole Earth may be bored, and that the moon
May through the center creep and so displease
Her brother's noontide with th' Antipodes.
It cannot be but thou hast murdered him.
So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.

DEMETRIUS
So should the murdered look, and so should I,
Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty.
Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear,
As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere.

HERMIA
What's this to my Lysander? Where is he?
Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?

DEMETRIUS
I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.

HERMIA
Out, dog! Out, cur! Thou driv'st me past the bounds
Of maiden's patience. Hast thou slain him, then?
Henceforth be never numbered among men.
O, once tell true! Tell true, even for my sake!
Durst thou have looked upon him, being awake?
And hast thou killed him sleeping? O brave touch!
Could not a worm, an adder, do so much?
An adder did it, for with doubler tongue
Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.

DEMETRIUS
You spend your passion on a misprised mood.
I am not guilty of Lysander's blood,
Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.

HERMIA
I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.

DEMETRIUS
An if I could, what should I get therefor?

HERMIA
A privilege never to see me more.
And from thy hated presence part I so.
See me no more, whether he be dead or no.
[She exits.]

DEMETRIUS
There is no following her in this fierce vein.
Here, therefore, for a while I will remain.
So sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow
For debt that bankrout sleep doth sorrow owe,
Which now in some slight measure it will pay,
If for his tender here I make some stay.
[He lies down and falls asleep.]

OBERON, [to Robin]
What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite
And laid the love juice on some true-love's sight.
Of thy misprision must perforce ensue
Some true-love turned, and not a false turned true.

ROBIN
Then fate o'errules, that, one man holding troth,
A million fail, confounding oath on oath.

OBERON
About the wood go swifter than the wind,
And Helena of Athens look thou find.
All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer
With sighs of love that costs the fresh blood dear.
By some illusion see thou bring her here.
I'll charm his eyes against she do appear.

ROBIN  I go, I go, look how I go,
Swifter than arrow from the Tartar's bow.	[He exits.]

OBERON, [applying the nectar to Demetrius' eyes]
	Flower of this purple dye,
	Hit with Cupid's archery,
	Sink in apple of his eye.
	When his love he doth espy,
	Let her shine as gloriously
	As the Venus of the sky.--
	When thou wak'st, if she be by,
	Beg of her for remedy.

[Enter Robin.]


ROBIN
	Captain of our fairy band,
	Helena is here at hand,
	And the youth, mistook by me,
	Pleading for a lover's fee.
	Shall we their fond pageant see?
	Lord, what fools these mortals be!

OBERON
	Stand aside. The noise they make
	Will cause Demetrius to awake.

ROBIN
	Then will two at once woo one.
	That must needs be sport alone.
	And those things do best please me
	That befall prepost'rously.
[They step aside.]

[Enter Lysander and Helena.]


LYSANDER
Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?
   Scorn and derision never come in tears.
Look when I vow, I weep; and vows so born,
   In their nativity all truth appears.
How can these things in me seem scorn to you,
Bearing the badge of faith to prove them true?

HELENA
You do advance your cunning more and more.
   When truth kills truth, O devilish holy fray!
These vows are Hermia's. Will you give her o'er?
   Weigh oath with oath and you will nothing
   weigh.
Your vows to her and me, put in two scales,
Will even weigh, and both as light as tales.

LYSANDER
I had no judgment when to her I swore.

HELENA
Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er.

LYSANDER
Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.

DEMETRIUS, [waking up]
O Helen, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine!
To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne?
Crystal is muddy. O, how ripe in show
Thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow!
That pure congealed white, high Taurus' snow,
Fanned with the eastern wind, turns to a crow
When thou hold'st up thy hand. O, let me kiss
This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!

HELENA
O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent
To set against me for your merriment.
If you were civil and knew courtesy,
You would not do me thus much injury.
Can you not hate me, as I know you do,
But you must join in souls to mock me too?
If you were men, as men you are in show,
You would not use a gentle lady so,
To vow and swear and superpraise my parts,
When, I am sure, you hate me with your hearts.
You both are rivals and love Hermia,
And now both rivals to mock Helena.
A trim exploit, a manly enterprise,
To conjure tears up in a poor maid's eyes
With your derision! None of noble sort
Would so offend a virgin and extort
A poor soul's patience, all to make you sport.

LYSANDER
You are unkind, Demetrius. Be not so,
For you love Hermia; this you know I know.
And here with all goodwill, with all my heart,
In Hermia's love I yield you up my part.
And yours of Helena to me bequeath,
Whom I do love and will do till my death.

HELENA
Never did mockers waste more idle breath.

DEMETRIUS
Lysander, keep thy Hermia. I will none.
If e'er I loved her, all that love is gone.
My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourned,
And now to Helen is it home returned,
There to remain.

LYSANDER  Helen, it is not so.

DEMETRIUS
Disparage not the faith thou dost not know,
Lest to thy peril thou aby it dear.
Look where thy love comes. Yonder is thy dear.

[Enter Hermia.]


HERMIA, [to Lysander]
Dark night, that from the eye his function takes,
The ear more quick of apprehension makes;
Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense,
It pays the hearing double recompense.
Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found;
Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound.
But why unkindly didst thou leave me so?

LYSANDER
Why should he stay whom love doth press to go?

HERMIA
What love could press Lysander from my side?

LYSANDER
Lysander's love, that would not let him bide,
Fair Helena, who more engilds the night
Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light.
Why seek'st thou me? Could not this make thee
know
The hate I bear thee made me leave thee so?

HERMIA
You speak not as you think. It cannot be.

HELENA
Lo, she is one of this confederacy!
Now I perceive they have conjoined all three
To fashion this false sport in spite of me.--
Injurious Hermia, most ungrateful maid,
Have you conspired, have you with these contrived,
To bait me with this foul derision?
Is all the counsel that we two have shared,
The sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent
When we have chid the hasty-footed time
For parting us--O, is all forgot?
All schooldays' friendship, childhood innocence?
We, Hermia, like two artificial gods,
Have with our needles created both one flower,
Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion,
Both warbling of one song, both in one key,
As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds
Had been incorporate. So we grew together
Like to a double cherry, seeming parted,
But yet an union in partition,
Two lovely berries molded on one stem;
So with two seeming bodies but one heart,
Two of the first, like coats in heraldry,
Due but to one, and crowned with one crest.
And will you rent our ancient love asunder,
To join with men in scorning your poor friend?
It is not friendly; 'tis not maidenly.
Our sex, as well as I, may chide you for it,
Though I alone do feel the injury.

HERMIA
I am amazed at your words.
I scorn you not. It seems that you scorn me.

HELENA
Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn,
To follow me and praise my eyes and face,
And made your other love, Demetrius,
Who even but now did spurn me with his foot,
To call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare,
Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this
To her he hates? And wherefore doth Lysander
Deny your love (so rich within his soul)
And tender me, forsooth, affection,
But by your setting on, by your consent?
What though I be not so in grace as you,
So hung upon with love, so fortunate,
But miserable most, to love unloved?
This you should pity rather than despise.

HERMIA
I understand not what you mean by this.

HELENA
Ay, do. Persever, counterfeit sad looks,
Make mouths upon me when I turn my back,
Wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up.
This sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.
If you have any pity, grace, or manners,
You would not make me such an argument.
But fare you well. 'Tis partly my own fault,
Which death or absence soon shall remedy.

LYSANDER
Stay, gentle Helena. Hear my excuse,
My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena.

HELENA
O excellent!

HERMIA, [to Lysander]
Sweet, do not scorn her so.

DEMETRIUS, [to Lysander]
If she cannot entreat, I can compel.

LYSANDER
Thou canst compel no more than she entreat.
Thy threats have no more strength than her weak
prayers.--
Helen, I love thee. By my life, I do.
I swear by that which I will lose for thee,
To prove him false that says I love thee not.

DEMETRIUS
I say I love thee more than he can do.

LYSANDER
If thou say so, withdraw and prove it too.

DEMETRIUS
Quick, come.

HERMIA  Lysander, whereto tends all this?
[She takes hold of Lysander.]

LYSANDER
Away, you Ethiop!

DEMETRIUS, [to Hermia]
No, no. He'll
Seem to break loose. [To Lysander.] Take on as you
would follow,
But yet come not. You are a tame man, go!

LYSANDER, [to Hermia]
Hang off, thou cat, thou burr! Vile thing, let loose,
Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.

HERMIA
Why are you grown so rude? What change is this,
Sweet love?

LYSANDER  Thy love? Out, tawny Tartar, out!
Out, loathed med'cine! O, hated potion, hence!

HERMIA
Do you not jest?

HELENA  Yes, sooth, and so do you.

LYSANDER
Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.

DEMETRIUS
I would I had your bond. For I perceive
A weak bond holds you. I'll not trust your word.

LYSANDER
What? Should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead?
Although I hate her, I'll not harm her so.

HERMIA
What, can you do me greater harm than hate?
Hate me? Wherefore? O me, what news, my love?
Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander?
I am as fair now as I was erewhile.
Since night you loved me; yet since night you left
me.
Why, then, you left me--O, the gods forbid!--
In earnest, shall I say?

LYSANDER  Ay, by my life,
And never did desire to see thee more.
Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt.
Be certain, nothing truer, 'tis no jest
That I do hate thee and love Helena.
[Hermia turns him loose.]

HERMIA
O me! [To Helena.] You juggler, you cankerblossom,
You thief of love! What, have you come by night
And stol'n my love's heart from him?

HELENA  Fine, i' faith.
Have you no modesty, no maiden shame,
No touch of bashfulness? What, will you tear
Impatient answers from my gentle tongue?
Fie, fie, you counterfeit, you puppet, you!

HERMIA
"Puppet"? Why so? Ay, that way goes the game.
Now I perceive that she hath made compare
Between our statures; she hath urged her height,
And with her personage, her tall personage,
Her height, forsooth, she hath prevailed with him.
And are you grown so high in his esteem
Because I am so dwarfish and so low?
How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak!
How low am I? I am not yet so low
But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.

HELENA
I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen,
Let her not hurt me. I was never curst;
I have no gift at all in shrewishness.
I am a right maid for my cowardice.
Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think,
Because she is something lower than myself,
That I can match her.

HERMIA  "Lower"? Hark, again!

HELENA
Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me.
I evermore did love you, Hermia,
Did ever keep your counsels, never wronged you--
Save that, in love unto Demetrius,
I told him of your stealth unto this wood.
He followed you; for love, I followed him.
But he hath chid me hence and threatened me
To strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too.
And now, so you will let me quiet go,
To Athens will I bear my folly back
And follow you no further. Let me go.
You see how simple and how fond I am.

HERMIA
Why, get you gone. Who is 't that hinders you?

HELENA
A foolish heart that I leave here behind.

HERMIA
What, with Lysander?

HELENA  With Demetrius.

LYSANDER
Be not afraid. She shall not harm thee, Helena.

DEMETRIUS
No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.

HELENA
O, when she is angry, she is keen and shrewd.
She was a vixen when she went to school,
And though she be but little, she is fierce.

HERMIA
"Little" again? Nothing but "low" and "little"?
Why will you suffer her to flout me thus?
Let me come to her.

LYSANDER  Get you gone, you dwarf,
You minimus of hind'ring knotgrass made,
You bead, you acorn--

DEMETRIUS  You are too officious
In her behalf that scorns your services.
Let her alone. Speak not of Helena.
Take not her part. For if thou dost intend
Never so little show of love to her,
Thou shalt aby it.

LYSANDER  Now she holds me not.
Now follow, if thou dar'st, to try whose right,
Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.

DEMETRIUS
"Follow"? Nay, I'll go with thee, cheek by jowl.
[Demetrius and Lysander exit.]

HERMIA
You, mistress, all this coil is long of you.
[Helena retreats.]
Nay, go not back.

HELENA  I will not trust you, I,
Nor longer stay in your curst company.
Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray.
My legs are longer though, to run away.	[She exits.]

HERMIA
I am amazed and know not what to say.	[She exits.]

OBERON, [to Robin]
This is thy negligence. Still thou mistak'st,
Or else committ'st thy knaveries willfully.

ROBIN
Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook.
Did not you tell me I should know the man
By the Athenian garments he had on?
And so far blameless proves my enterprise
That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes;
And so far am I glad it so did sort,
As this their jangling I esteem a sport.

OBERON
Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight.
Hie, therefore, Robin, overcast the night;
The starry welkin cover thou anon
With drooping fog as black as Acheron,
And lead these testy rivals so astray
As one come not within another's way.
Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue;
Then stir Demetrius up with bitter wrong.
And sometime rail thou like Demetrius.
And from each other look thou lead them thus,
Till o'er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep
With leaden legs and batty wings doth creep.
Then crush this herb into Lysander's eye,
[He gives a flower to Robin.]
Whose liquor hath this virtuous property,
To take from thence all error with his might
And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight.
When they next wake, all this derision
Shall seem a dream and fruitless vision.
And back to Athens shall the lovers wend,
With league whose date till death shall never end.
Whiles I in this affair do thee employ,
I'll to my queen and beg her Indian boy;
And then I will her charmed eye release
From monster's view, and all things shall be peace.

ROBIN
My fairy lord, this must be done with haste,
For night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast,
And yonder shines Aurora's harbinger,
At whose approach, ghosts wand'ring here and
there
Troop home to churchyards. Damned spirits all,
That in crossways and floods have burial,
Already to their wormy beds are gone.
For fear lest day should look their shames upon,
They willfully themselves exile from light
And must for aye consort with black-browed night.

OBERON
But we are spirits of another sort.
I with the Morning's love have oft made sport
And, like a forester, the groves may tread
Even till the eastern gate, all fiery red,
Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams,
Turns into yellow gold his salt-green streams.
But notwithstanding, haste! Make no delay.
We may effect this business yet ere day.	[He exits.]

ROBIN
	Up and down, up and down,
	I will lead them up and down.
	I am feared in field and town.
	Goblin, lead them up and down.
Here comes one.

[Enter Lysander.]


LYSANDER
Where art thou, proud Demetrius? Speak thou now.

ROBIN, [in Demetrius' voice]
Here, villain, drawn and ready. Where art thou?

LYSANDER  I will be with thee straight.

ROBIN, [in Demetrius' voice]  Follow me, then, to
plainer ground.	[Lysander exits.]

[Enter Demetrius.]


DEMETRIUS  Lysander, speak again.
Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled?
Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy
head?

ROBIN, [in Lysander's voice]
Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars,
Telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars,
And wilt not come? Come, recreant! Come, thou
child!
I'll whip thee with a rod. He is defiled
That draws a sword on thee.

DEMETRIUS  Yea, art thou there?

ROBIN, [in Lysander's voice]
Follow my voice. We'll try no manhood here.
[They exit.]

[Enter Lysander.]


LYSANDER
He goes before me and still dares me on.
When I come where he calls, then he is gone.
The villain is much lighter-heeled than I.
I followed fast, but faster he did fly,
That fallen am I in dark uneven way,
And here will rest me. Come, thou gentle day,
For if but once thou show me thy gray light,
I'll find Demetrius and revenge this spite.
[He lies down and sleeps.]

[Enter Robin and Demetrius.]


ROBIN, [in Lysander's voice]
Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why com'st thou not?

DEMETRIUS
Abide me, if thou dar'st, for well I wot
Thou runn'st before me, shifting every place,
And dar'st not stand nor look me in the face.
Where art thou now?

ROBIN, [in Lysander's voice]
Come hither. I am here.

DEMETRIUS
Nay, then, thou mock'st me. Thou shalt buy this
dear
If ever I thy face by daylight see.
Now go thy way. Faintness constraineth me
To measure out my length on this cold bed.
By day's approach look to be visited.
[He lies down and sleeps.]

[Enter Helena.]


HELENA
O weary night, O long and tedious night,
   Abate thy hours! Shine, comforts, from the east,
That I may back to Athens by daylight
   From these that my poor company detest.
And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye,
Steal me awhile from mine own company.
[She lies down and sleeps.]

ROBIN
	Yet but three? Come one more.
	Two of both kinds makes up four.
	Here she comes, curst and sad.
	Cupid is a knavish lad
	Thus to make poor females mad.

[Enter Hermia.]


HERMIA
Never so weary, never so in woe,
   Bedabbled with the dew and torn with briers,
I can no further crawl, no further go.
   My legs can keep no pace with my desires.
Here will I rest me till the break of day.
Heavens shield Lysander if they mean a fray!
[She lies down and sleeps.]

ROBIN
	   On the ground
	   Sleep sound.
	   I'll apply
	   To your eye,
	Gentle lover, remedy.

[Robin applies the nectar 
 to Lysander's eyes.]
	   When thou wak'st,
	   Thou tak'st
	   True delight
	   In the sight
	Of thy former lady's eye.
	And the country proverb known,
	That every man should take his own,
	In your waking shall be shown.
	   Jack shall have Jill;
	   Naught shall go ill;
	The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be
well.
[He exits.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[With the four lovers still asleep onstage, enter
Titania, Queen of Fairies, and Bottom and Fairies,
and Oberon, the King, behind them unseen by those
onstage.]


TITANIA
Come, sit thee down upon this flow'ry bed,
   While I thy amiable cheeks do coy,
And stick muskroses in thy sleek smooth head,
   And kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.

BOTTOM  Where's Peaseblossom?

PEASEBLOSSOM  Ready.

BOTTOM  Scratch my head, Peaseblossom. Where's
Monsieur Cobweb?

COBWEB  Ready.

BOTTOM  Monsieur Cobweb, good monsieur, get you
your weapons in your hand and kill me a red-hipped
humble-bee on the top of a thistle, and, good
monsieur, bring me the honey-bag. Do not fret
yourself too much in the action, monsieur, and,
good monsieur, have a care the honey-bag break
not; I would be loath to have you overflown with a
honey-bag, signior. [Cobweb exits.] Where's Monsieur
Mustardseed?

MUSTARDSEED  Ready.

BOTTOM  Give me your neaf, Monsieur Mustardseed.
Pray you, leave your courtesy, good monsieur.

MUSTARDSEED  What's your will?

BOTTOM  Nothing, good monsieur, but to help Cavalery
Cobweb to scratch. I must to the barber's,
monsieur, for methinks I am marvels hairy about
the face. And I am such a tender ass, if my hair do
but tickle me, I must scratch.

TITANIA
What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?

BOTTOM  I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let's
have the tongs and the bones.

TITANIA
Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.

BOTTOM  Truly, a peck of provender. I could munch
your good dry oats. Methinks I have a great desire
to a bottle of hay. Good hay, sweet hay, hath no
fellow.

TITANIA
I have a venturous fairy that shall seek
The squirrel's hoard and fetch thee new nuts.

BOTTOM  I had rather have a handful or two of dried
peas. But, I pray you, let none of your people stir
me; I have an exposition of sleep come upon me.

TITANIA
Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.--
Fairies, begone, and be all ways away.
[Fairies exit.]
So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle
Gently entwist; the female ivy so
Enrings the barky fingers of the elm.
O, how I love thee! How I dote on thee!
[Bottom and Titania sleep.]

[Enter Robin Goodfellow.]


OBERON
Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet sight?
Her dotage now I do begin to pity.
For, meeting her of late behind the wood,
Seeking sweet favors for this hateful fool,
I did upbraid her and fall out with her.
For she his hairy temples then had rounded
With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers;
And that same dew, which sometime on the buds
Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls,
Stood now within the pretty flouriets' eyes,
Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail.
When I had at my pleasure taunted her,
And she in mild terms begged my patience,
I then did ask of her her changeling child,
Which straight she gave me, and her fairy sent
To bear him to my bower in Fairyland.
And now I have the boy, I will undo
This hateful imperfection of her eyes.
And, gentle Puck, take this transformed scalp
From off the head of this Athenian swain,
That he, awaking when the other do,
May all to Athens back again repair
And think no more of this night's accidents
But as the fierce vexation of a dream.
But first I will release the Fairy Queen.
[He applies the nectar to her eyes.]
	Be as thou wast wont to be.
	See as thou wast wont to see.
	Dian's bud o'er Cupid's flower
	Hath such force and blessed power.
Now, my Titania, wake you, my sweet queen.

TITANIA, [waking]
My Oberon, what visions have I seen!
Methought I was enamored of an ass.

OBERON
There lies your love.

TITANIA  How came these things to pass?
O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!

OBERON
Silence awhile.--Robin, take off this head.--
Titania, music call; and strike more dead
Than common sleep of all these five the sense.

TITANIA
Music, ho, music such as charmeth sleep!

ROBIN, [removing the ass-head from Bottom]
Now, when thou wak'st, with thine own fool's eyes
peep.

OBERON
Sound music.	[Music.]
Come, my queen, take hands with me,
And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be.
[Titania and Oberon dance.]
Now thou and I are new in amity,
And will tomorrow midnight solemnly
Dance in Duke Theseus' house triumphantly,
And bless it to all fair prosperity.
There shall the pairs of faithful lovers be
Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity.

ROBIN
	Fairy king, attend and mark.
	I do hear the morning lark.

OBERON
	Then, my queen, in silence sad
	Trip we after night's shade.
	We the globe can compass soon,
	Swifter than the wand'ring moon.

TITANIA
	Come, my lord, and in our flight
	Tell me how it came this night
	That I sleeping here was found
	With these mortals on the ground.
[Oberon, Robin, and Titania exit.]

[Wind horn. Enter Theseus and all his train,
Hippolyta, Egeus.]


THESEUS
Go, one of you, find out the Forester.
For now our observation is performed,
And, since we have the vaward of the day,
My love shall hear the music of my hounds.
Uncouple in the western valley; let them go.
Dispatch, I say, and find the Forester.
[A Servant exits.]
We will, fair queen, up to the mountain's top
And mark the musical confusion
Of hounds and echo in conjunction.

HIPPOLYTA
I was with Hercules and Cadmus once,
When in a wood of Crete they bayed the bear
With hounds of Sparta. Never did I hear
Such gallant chiding, for, besides the groves,
The skies, the fountains, every region near
Seemed all one mutual cry. I never heard
So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.

THESEUS
My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind,
So flewed, so sanded; and their heads are hung
With ears that sweep away the morning dew;
Crook-kneed, and dewlapped like Thessalian bulls;
Slow in pursuit, but matched in mouth like bells,
Each under each. A cry more tunable
Was never holloed to, nor cheered with horn,
In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly.
Judge when you hear.--But soft! What nymphs are
these?

EGEUS
My lord, this is my daughter here asleep,
And this Lysander; this Demetrius is,
This Helena, old Nedar's Helena.
I wonder of their being here together.

THESEUS
No doubt they rose up early to observe
The rite of May, and hearing our intent,
Came here in grace of our solemnity.
But speak, Egeus. Is not this the day
That Hermia should give answer of her choice?

EGEUS  It is, my lord.

THESEUS
Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.
[A Servant exits.]
[Shout within. Wind horns. They all start up.]

THESEUS
Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past.
Begin these woodbirds but to couple now?
[Demetrius, Helena, Hermia, and Lysander kneel.]

LYSANDER
Pardon, my lord.

THESEUS  I pray you all, stand up.
[They rise.]
I know you two are rival enemies.
How comes this gentle concord in the world,
That hatred is so far from jealousy
To sleep by hate and fear no enmity?

LYSANDER
My lord, I shall reply amazedly,
Half sleep, half waking. But as yet, I swear,
I cannot truly say how I came here.
But, as I think--for truly would I speak,
And now I do bethink me, so it is:
I came with Hermia hither. Our intent
Was to be gone from Athens, where we might,
Without the peril of the Athenian law--

EGEUS
Enough, enough!--My lord, you have enough.
I beg the law, the law upon his head.
They would have stol'n away.--They would,
Demetrius,
Thereby to have defeated you and me:
You of your wife and me of my consent,
Of my consent that she should be your wife.

DEMETRIUS
My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth,
Of this their purpose hither to this wood,
And I in fury hither followed them,
Fair Helena in fancy following me.
But, my good lord, I wot not by what power
(But by some power it is) my love to Hermia,
Melted as the snow, seems to me now
As the remembrance of an idle gaud
Which in my childhood I did dote upon,
And all the faith, the virtue of my heart,
The object and the pleasure of mine eye,
Is only Helena. To her, my lord,
Was I betrothed ere I saw Hermia.
But like a sickness did I loathe this food.
But, as in health, come to my natural taste,
Now I do wish it, love it, long for it,
And will forevermore be true to it.

THESEUS
Fair lovers, you are fortunately met.
Of this discourse we more will hear anon.--
Egeus, I will overbear your will,
For in the temple by and by, with us,
These couples shall eternally be knit.--
And, for the morning now is something worn,
Our purposed hunting shall be set aside.
Away with us to Athens. Three and three,
We'll hold a feast in great solemnity.
Come, Hippolyta.
[Theseus and his train,
including Hippolyta and Egeus, exit.]

DEMETRIUS
These things seem small and undistinguishable,
Like far-off mountains turned into clouds.

HERMIA
Methinks I see these things with parted eye,
When everything seems double.

HELENA  So methinks.
And I have found Demetrius like a jewel,
Mine own and not mine own.

DEMETRIUS  Are you sure
That we are awake? It seems to me
That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think
The Duke was here and bid us follow him?

HERMIA
Yea, and my father.

HELENA  And Hippolyta.

LYSANDER
And he did bid us follow to the temple.

DEMETRIUS
Why, then, we are awake. Let's follow him,
And by the way let us recount our dreams.
[Lovers exit.]

BOTTOM, [waking up]   When my cue comes, call me,
and I will answer. My next is "Most fair Pyramus."
Hey-ho! Peter Quince! Flute the bellows-mender!
Snout the tinker! Starveling! God's my life! Stolen
hence and left me asleep! I have had a most rare
vision. I have had a dream past the wit of man to say
what dream it was. Man is but an ass if he go about
to expound this dream. Methought I was--there
is no man can tell what. Methought I was and
methought I had--but man is but a patched fool if
he will offer to say what methought I had. The eye of
man hath not heard, the ear of man hath not seen,
man's hand is not able to taste, his tongue to
conceive, nor his heart to report what my dream
was. I will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of this
dream. It shall be called "Bottom's Dream" because
it hath no bottom; and I will sing it in the
latter end of a play, before the Duke. Peradventure,
to make it the more gracious, I shall sing it at her
death.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Quince, Flute, Snout, and Starveling.]


QUINCE  Have you sent to Bottom's house? Is he come
home yet?

STARVELING  He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he
is transported.

FLUTE  If he come not, then the play is marred. It goes
not forward, doth it?

QUINCE  It is not possible. You have not a man in all
Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he.

FLUTE  No, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraftman
in Athens.

QUINCE  Yea, and the best person too, and he is a very
paramour for a sweet voice.

FLUTE  You must say "paragon." A "paramour" is (God
bless us) a thing of naught.

[Enter Snug the joiner.]


SNUG  Masters, the Duke is coming from the temple,
and there is two or three lords and ladies more
married. If our sport had gone forward, we had all
been made men.

FLUTE  O, sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence
a day during his life. He could not have
'scaped sixpence a day. An the Duke had not given
him sixpence a day for playing Pyramus, I'll be
hanged. He would have deserved it. Sixpence a day
in Pyramus, or nothing!

[Enter Bottom.]


BOTTOM  Where are these lads? Where are these
hearts?

QUINCE  Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy
hour!

BOTTOM  Masters, I am to discourse wonders. But ask
me not what; for, if I tell you, I am not true
Athenian. I will tell you everything right as it fell
out.

QUINCE  Let us hear, sweet Bottom.

BOTTOM  Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is that
the Duke hath dined. Get your apparel together,
good strings to your beards, new ribbons to your
pumps. Meet presently at the palace. Every man
look o'er his part. For the short and the long is, our
play is preferred. In any case, let Thisbe have clean
linen, and let not him that plays the lion pare his
nails, for they shall hang out for the lion's claws.
And, most dear actors, eat no onions nor garlic, for
we are to utter sweet breath, and I do not doubt but
to hear them say it is a sweet comedy. No more
words. Away! Go, away!
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Theseus, Hippolyta, and Philostrate, Lords, and
Attendants.]


HIPPOLYTA
'Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.

THESEUS
More strange than true. I never may believe
These antique fables nor these fairy toys.
Lovers and madmen have such seething brains,
Such shaping fantasies, that apprehend
More than cool reason ever comprehends.
The lunatic, the lover, and the poet
Are of imagination all compact.
One sees more devils than vast hell can hold:
That is the madman. The lover, all as frantic,
Sees Helen's beauty in a brow of Egypt.
The poet's eye, in a fine frenzy rolling,
Doth glance from heaven to Earth, from Earth to
heaven,
And as imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen
Turns them to shapes and gives to airy nothing
A local habitation and a name.
Such tricks hath strong imagination
That, if it would but apprehend some joy,
It comprehends some bringer of that joy.
Or in the night, imagining some fear,
How easy is a bush supposed a bear!

HIPPOLYTA
But all the story of the night told over,
And all their minds transfigured so together,
More witnesseth than fancy's images
And grows to something of great constancy,
But, howsoever, strange and admirable.

[Enter Lovers: Lysander, Demetrius, Hermia, and Helena.]


THESEUS
Here come the lovers full of joy and mirth.--
Joy, gentle friends! Joy and fresh days of love
Accompany your hearts!

LYSANDER  More than to us
Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!

THESEUS
Come now, what masques, what dances shall we
have
To wear away this long age of three hours
Between our after-supper and bedtime?
Where is our usual manager of mirth?
What revels are in hand? Is there no play
To ease the anguish of a torturing hour?
Call Philostrate.

PHILOSTRATE, [coming forward]  Here, mighty Theseus.

THESEUS
Say what abridgment have you for this evening,
What masque, what music? How shall we beguile
The lazy time if not with some delight?

PHILOSTRATE, [giving Theseus a paper]
There is a brief how many sports are ripe.
Make choice of which your Highness will see first.

THESEUS
"The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung
By an Athenian eunuch to the harp."
We'll none of that. That have I told my love
In glory of my kinsman Hercules.
"The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals,
Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage."
That is an old device, and it was played
When I from Thebes came last a conqueror.
"The thrice-three Muses mourning for the death
Of learning, late deceased in beggary."
That is some satire, keen and critical,
Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony.
"A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus
And his love Thisbe, very tragical mirth."
"Merry" and "tragical"? "Tedious" and "brief"?
That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow!
How shall we find the concord of this discord?

PHILOSTRATE
A play there is, my lord, some ten words long
(Which is as brief as I have known a play),
But by ten words, my lord, it is too long,
Which makes it tedious; for in all the play,
There is not one word apt, one player fitted.
And tragical, my noble lord, it is.
For Pyramus therein doth kill himself,
Which, when I saw rehearsed, I must confess,
Made mine eyes water; but more merry tears
The passion of loud laughter never shed.

THESEUS
What are they that do play it?

PHILOSTRATE
Hard-handed men that work in Athens here,
Which never labored in their minds till now,
And now have toiled their unbreathed memories
With this same play, against your nuptial.

THESEUS
And we will hear it.

PHILOSTRATE  No, my noble lord,
It is not for you. I have heard it over,
And it is nothing, nothing in the world,
Unless you can find sport in their intents,
Extremely stretched and conned with cruel pain
To do you service.

THESEUS  I will hear that play,
For never anything can be amiss
When simpleness and duty tender it.
Go, bring them in--and take your places, ladies.
[Philostrate exits.]

HIPPOLYTA
I love not to see wretchedness o'ercharged,
And duty in his service perishing.

THESEUS
Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.

HIPPOLYTA
He says they can do nothing in this kind.

THESEUS
The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing.
Our sport shall be to take what they mistake;
And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect
Takes it in might, not merit.
Where I have come, great clerks have purposed
To greet me with premeditated welcomes,
Where I have seen them shiver and look pale,
Make periods in the midst of sentences,
Throttle their practiced accent in their fears,
And in conclusion dumbly have broke off,
Not paying me a welcome. Trust me, sweet,
Out of this silence yet I picked a welcome,
And in the modesty of fearful duty,
I read as much as from the rattling tongue
Of saucy and audacious eloquence.
Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity
In least speak most, to my capacity.

[Enter Philostrate.]


PHILOSTRATE
So please your Grace, the Prologue is addressed.

THESEUS  Let him approach.

[Enter the Prologue.]


PROLOGUE
If we offend, it is with our goodwill.
   That you should think we come not to offend,
But with goodwill. To show our simple skill,
   That is the true beginning of our end.
Consider, then, we come but in despite.
   We do not come, as minding to content you,
Our true intent is. All for your delight
   We are not here. That you should here repent
   you,
The actors are at hand, and, by their show,
You shall know all that you are like to know.
[Prologue exits.]

THESEUS  This fellow doth not stand upon points.

LYSANDER  He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt;
he knows not the stop. A good moral, my lord: it is
not enough to speak, but to speak true.

HIPPOLYTA  Indeed he hath played on this prologue like
a child on a recorder--a sound, but not in
government.

THESEUS  His speech was like a tangled chain--nothing
impaired, but all disordered. Who is next?

[Enter Pyramus (Bottom), and Thisbe (Flute), and
Wall (Snout), and Moonshine (Starveling), and Lion
(Snug), and Prologue (Quince).]


QUINCE, [as Prologue]
Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show.
   But wonder on, till truth make all things plain.
This man is Pyramus, if you would know.
   This beauteous lady Thisbe is certain.
This man with lime and roughcast doth present
   "Wall," that vile wall which did these lovers
   sunder;
And through Wall's chink, poor souls, they are
content
   To whisper, at the which let no man wonder.
This man, with lantern, dog, and bush of thorn,
   Presenteth "Moonshine," for, if you will know,
By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn
   To meet at Ninus' tomb, there, there to woo.
This grisly beast (which "Lion" hight by name)
   The trusty Thisbe coming first by night
Did scare away or rather did affright;
And, as she fled, her mantle she did fall,
   Which Lion vile with bloody mouth did stain.
Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall,
   And finds his trusty Thisbe's mantle slain.
Whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade,
   He bravely broached his boiling bloody breast.
And Thisbe, tarrying in mulberry shade,
   His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest,
Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers twain
At large discourse, while here they do remain.

THESEUS  I wonder if the lion be to speak.

DEMETRIUS  No wonder, my lord. One lion may when
many asses do.
[Lion, Thisbe, Moonshine, and Prologue exit.]

SNOUT, [as Wall]
In this same interlude it doth befall
That I, one Snout by name, present a wall;
And such a wall as I would have you think
That had in it a crannied hole or chink,
Through which the lovers, Pyramus and Thisbe,
Did whisper often, very secretly.
This loam, this roughcast, and this stone doth show
That I am that same wall. The truth is so.
And this the cranny is, right and sinister,
Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.

THESEUS  Would you desire lime and hair to speak
better?

DEMETRIUS  It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard
discourse, my lord.

THESEUS  Pyramus draws near the wall. Silence.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
O grim-looked night! O night with hue so black!
   O night, which ever art when day is not!
O night! O night! Alack, alack, alack!
   I fear my Thisbe's promise is forgot.
And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,
   That stand'st between her father's ground and
   mine,
Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and lovely wall,
   Show me thy chink to blink through with mine
   eyne.
Thanks, courteous wall. Jove shield thee well for
this.
   But what see I? No Thisbe do I see.
O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss,
   Cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me!

THESEUS  The wall, methinks, being sensible, should
curse again.

BOTTOM  No, in truth, sir, he should not. "Deceiving
me" is Thisbe's cue. She is to enter now, and I am
to spy her through the wall. You shall see it will fall
pat as I told you. Yonder she comes.

[Enter Thisbe (Flute).]


FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
O wall, full often hast thou heard my moans
   For parting my fair Pyramus and me.
My cherry lips have often kissed thy stones,
   Thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
I see a voice! Now will I to the chink
   To spy an I can hear my Thisbe's face.
Thisbe?

FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
My love! Thou art my love, I think.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
   Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover's grace,
And, like Limander, am I trusty still.

FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.

FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
O kiss me through the hole of this vile wall.

FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
I kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straightway?

FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
'Tide life, 'tide death, I come without delay.
[Bottom and Flute exit.]

SNOUT, [as Wall]
Thus have I, Wall, my part discharged so,
And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.	[He exits.]

THESEUS  Now is the wall down between the two
neighbors.

DEMETRIUS  No remedy, my lord, when walls are so
willful to hear without warning.

HIPPOLYTA  This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.

THESEUS  The best in this kind are but shadows, and
the worst are no worse, if imagination amend
them.

HIPPOLYTA  It must be your imagination, then, and not
theirs.

THESEUS  If we imagine no worse of them than they of
themselves, they may pass for excellent men. Here
come two noble beasts in, a man and a lion.

[Enter Lion (Snug) and Moonshine (Starveling).]


SNUG, [as Lion]
You ladies, you whose gentle hearts do fear
   The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on
   floor,
May now perchance both quake and tremble here,
   When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar.
Then know that I, as Snug the joiner, am
A lion fell, nor else no lion's dam;
For if I should as lion come in strife
Into this place, 'twere pity on my life.

THESEUS  A very gentle beast, and of a good
conscience.

DEMETRIUS  The very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er I
saw.

LYSANDER  This lion is a very fox for his valor.

THESEUS  True, and a goose for his discretion.

DEMETRIUS  Not so, my lord, for his valor cannot carry
his discretion, and the fox carries the goose.

THESEUS  His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his
valor, for the goose carries not the fox. It is well.
Leave it to his discretion, and let us listen to the
Moon.

STARVELING, [as Moonshine]
This lanthorn doth the horned moon present.

DEMETRIUS  He should have worn the horns on his
head.

THESEUS  He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible
within the circumference.

STARVELING, [as Moonshine]
This lanthorn doth the horned moon present.
Myself the man i' th' moon do seem to be.

THESEUS  This is the greatest error of all the rest; the
man should be put into the lanthorn. How is it else
"the man i' th' moon"?

DEMETRIUS  He dares not come there for the candle,
for you see, it is already in snuff.

HIPPOLYTA  I am aweary of this moon. Would he would
change.

THESEUS  It appears by his small light of discretion that
he is in the wane; but yet, in courtesy, in all reason,
we must stay the time.

LYSANDER  Proceed, Moon.

STARVELING, [as Moonshine]   All that I have to say is to tell
you that the lanthorn is the moon, I the man i' th'
moon, this thornbush my thornbush, and this dog
my dog.

DEMETRIUS  Why, all these should be in the lanthorn,
for all these are in the moon. But silence. Here
comes Thisbe.

[Enter Thisbe (Flute).]


FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
This is old Ninny's tomb. Where is my love?

SNUG, [as Lion]  O!
[The Lion roars. Thisbe runs off,
dropping her mantle.]

DEMETRIUS  Well roared, Lion.

THESEUS  Well run, Thisbe.

HIPPOLYTA  Well shone, Moon. Truly, the Moon shines
with a good grace.
[Lion worries the mantle.]

THESEUS  Well moused, Lion.

[Enter Pyramus (Bottom).]


DEMETRIUS  And then came Pyramus.
[Lion exits.]

LYSANDER  And so the lion vanished.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams.
   I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright,
For by thy gracious, golden, glittering gleams,
   I trust to take of truest Thisbe sight.--
      But stay! O spite!
      But mark, poor knight,
   What dreadful dole is here!
      Eyes, do you see!
      How can it be!
   O dainty duck! O dear!
      Thy mantle good--
      What, stained with blood?
   Approach, ye Furies fell!
      O Fates, come, come,
      Cut thread and thrum,
   Quail, crush, conclude, and quell!

THESEUS  This passion, and the death of a dear friend,
would go near to make a man look sad.

HIPPOLYTA  Beshrew my heart but I pity the man.

BOTTOM, [as Pyramus]
O, wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame,
   Since lion vile hath here deflowered my dear,
Which is--no, no--which was the fairest dame
   That lived, that loved, that liked, that looked with
   cheer?
      Come, tears, confound!
      Out, sword, and wound
   The pap of Pyramus;
      Ay, that left pap,
      Where heart doth hop.	[Pyramus stabs himself.]
   Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.
      Now am I dead;
      Now am I fled;
   My soul is in the sky.
      Tongue, lose thy light!
      Moon, take thy flight!	[Moonshine exits.]
   Now die, die, die, die, die.	[Pyramus falls.]

DEMETRIUS  No die, but an ace for him, for he is but
one.

LYSANDER  Less than an ace, man, for he is dead, he is
nothing.

THESEUS  With the help of a surgeon he might yet
recover and yet prove an ass.

HIPPOLYTA  How chance Moonshine is gone before
Thisbe comes back and finds her lover?

THESEUS  She will find him by starlight.

[Enter Thisbe (Flute).]

Here she comes, and her passion ends the play.

HIPPOLYTA  Methinks she should not use a long one for
such a Pyramus. I hope she will be brief.

DEMETRIUS  A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus,
which Thisbe, is the better: he for a man, God
warrant us; she for a woman, God bless us.

LYSANDER  She hath spied him already with those
sweet eyes.

DEMETRIUS  And thus she means, videlicet--

FLUTE, [as Thisbe]
	      Asleep, my love?
	      What, dead, my dove?
	   O Pyramus, arise!
	      Speak, speak. Quite dumb?
	      Dead? Dead? A tomb
	   Must cover thy sweet eyes.
	      These lily lips,
	      This cherry nose,
	   These yellow cowslip cheeks
	      Are gone, are gone!
	      Lovers, make moan;
	   His eyes were green as leeks.
	      O Sisters Three,
	      Come, come to me
	   With hands as pale as milk.
	      Lay them in gore,
	      Since you have shore
	   With shears his thread of silk.
	      Tongue, not a word!
	      Come, trusty sword,
	   Come, blade, my breast imbrue!
[Thisbe stabs herself.]
	      And farewell, friends.
	      Thus Thisbe ends.
	   Adieu, adieu, adieu.	[Thisbe falls.]

THESEUS  Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the
dead.

DEMETRIUS  Ay, and Wall too.
[Bottom and Flute arise.]

BOTTOM  No, I assure you, the wall is down that
parted their fathers. Will it please you to see the
Epilogue or to hear a Bergomask dance between
two of our company?

THESEUS  No epilogue, I pray you. For your play needs
no excuse. Never excuse. For when the players are
all dead, there need none to be blamed. Marry, if
he that writ it had played Pyramus and hanged
himself in Thisbe's garter, it would have been a fine
tragedy; and so it is, truly, and very notably discharged.
But, come, your Bergomask. Let your
epilogue alone.
[Dance, and the players exit.]
The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve.
Lovers, to bed! 'Tis almost fairy time.
I fear we shall outsleep the coming morn
As much as we this night have overwatched.
This palpable-gross play hath well beguiled
The heavy gait of night. Sweet friends, to bed.
A fortnight hold we this solemnity
In nightly revels and new jollity.	[They exit.]

[Enter Robin Goodfellow.]


ROBIN
	Now the hungry lion roars,
	   And the wolf behowls the moon,
	Whilst the heavy plowman snores,
	   All with weary task fordone.
	Now the wasted brands do glow,
	   Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,
	Puts the wretch that lies in woe
	   In remembrance of a shroud.
	Now it is the time of night
	   That the graves, all gaping wide,
	Every one lets forth his sprite
	   In the church-way paths to glide.
	And we fairies, that do run
	   By the triple Hecate's team
	From the presence of the sun,
	   Following darkness like a dream,
	Now are frolic. Not a mouse
	Shall disturb this hallowed house.
	I am sent with broom before,
	To sweep the dust behind the door.

[Enter Oberon and Titania, King and Queen of Fairies,
with all their train.]


OBERON
	Through the house give glimmering light,
	   By the dead and drowsy fire.
	Every elf and fairy sprite,
	   Hop as light as bird from brier,
	And this ditty after me,
	Sing and dance it trippingly.

TITANIA
	First rehearse your song by rote,
	To each word a warbling note.
	Hand in hand, with fairy grace,
	Will we sing and bless this place.
[Oberon leads the Fairies in song and dance.]

OBERON
	Now, until the break of day,
	Through this house each fairy stray.
	To the best bride-bed will we,
	Which by us shall blessed be,
	And the issue there create
	Ever shall be fortunate.
	So shall all the couples three
	Ever true in loving be,
	And the blots of Nature's hand
	Shall not in their issue stand.
	Never mole, harelip, nor scar,
	Nor mark prodigious, such as are
	Despised in nativity,
	Shall upon their children be.
	With this field-dew consecrate
	Every fairy take his gait,
	And each several chamber bless,
	Through this palace, with sweet peace.
	And the owner of it blest,
	Ever shall in safety rest.
	Trip away. Make no stay.
	Meet me all by break of day.
[All but Robin exit.]

ROBIN
	If we shadows have offended,
	Think but this and all is mended:
	That you have but slumbered here
	While these visions did appear.
	And this weak and idle theme,
	No more yielding but a dream,
	Gentles, do not reprehend.
	If you pardon, we will mend.
	And, as I am an honest Puck,
	If we have unearned luck
	Now to 'scape the serpent's tongue,
	We will make amends ere long.
	Else the Puck a liar call.
	So good night unto you all.
	Give me your hands, if we be friends,
	And Robin shall restore amends.
[He exits.]
All's Well That Ends Well
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/alls-well-that-ends-well/
Created on Mar 14, 2018, from FDT version 0.9.2.2

Characters in the Play
======================
HELEN, a gentlewoman of Rossillion
BERTRAM, Count of Rossillion
COUNTESS of Rossillion, Bertram's mother
In the Countess's household:
  STEWARD
  FOOL
  PAGE
PAROLLES, companion to Bertram
KING of France
LAFEW, a French lord
Later Captains in the army of the Duke of Florence:
  FIRST LORD
  SECOND LORD
Other LORDS in the court of the King of France
From the court of the King of France:
  FIRST GENTLEMAN
  SECOND GENTLEMAN
  GENTLEMAN, a "gentle Astringer"
FIRST SOLDIER, interpreter
The DUKE of Florence
A WIDOW of Florence
DIANA, the Widow's daughter
MARIANA, the Widow's neighbor
Attendants, Soldiers, Citizens of Florence, Servants


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter young Bertram Count of Rossillion, his mother
the Countess, and Helen, Lord Lafew, all in black.]


COUNTESS  In delivering my son from me, I bury a second
husband.

BERTRAM  And I in going, madam, weep o'er my
father's death anew; but I must attend his Majesty's
command, to whom I am now in ward, evermore
in subjection.

LAFEW  You shall find of the King a husband, madam;
you, sir, a father. He that so generally is at all times
good must of necessity hold his virtue to you,
whose worthiness would stir it up where it wanted
rather than lack it where there is such abundance.

COUNTESS  What hope is there of his Majesty's
amendment?

LAFEW  He hath abandoned his physicians, madam,
under whose practices he hath persecuted time
with hope, and finds no other advantage in the
process but only the losing of hope by time.

COUNTESS  This young gentlewoman had a father--O,
that "had," how sad a passage 'tis!--whose skill
was almost as great as his honesty; had it stretched
so far, would have made nature immortal, and
death should have play for lack of work. Would for
the King's sake he were living! I think it would be
the death of the King's disease.

LAFEW  How called you the man you speak of,
madam?

COUNTESS  He was famous, sir, in his profession, and it
was his great right to be so: Gerard de Narbon.

LAFEW  He was excellent indeed, madam. The King
very lately spoke of him admiringly, and mourningly.
He was skillful enough to have lived still, if
knowledge could be set up against mortality.

BERTRAM  What is it, my good lord, the King languishes
of?

LAFEW  A fistula, my lord.

BERTRAM  I heard not of it before.

LAFEW  I would it were not notorious.--Was this gentlewoman
the daughter of Gerard de Narbon?

COUNTESS  His sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to
my overlooking. I have those hopes of her good
that her education promises. Her dispositions she
inherits, which makes fair gifts fairer; for where an
unclean mind carries virtuous qualities, there
commendations go with pity--they are virtues and
traitors too. In her they are the better for their simpleness.
She derives her honesty and achieves her
goodness.

LAFEW  Your commendations, madam, get from her
tears.

COUNTESS  'Tis the best brine a maiden can season her
praise in. The remembrance of her father never
approaches her heart but the tyranny of her sorrows
takes all livelihood from her cheek.--No
more of this, Helena. Go to. No more, lest it be
rather thought you affect a sorrow than to have--

HELEN  I do affect a sorrow indeed, but I have it too.

LAFEW  Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead,
excessive grief the enemy to the living.

COUNTESS  If the living be enemy to the grief, the
excess makes it soon mortal.

BERTRAM  Madam, I desire your holy wishes.

LAFEW  How understand we that?

COUNTESS
Be thou blessed, Bertram, and succeed thy father
In manners as in shape. Thy blood and virtue
Contend for empire in thee, and thy goodness
Share with thy birthright. Love all, trust a few,
Do wrong to none. Be able for thine enemy
Rather in power than use, and keep thy friend
Under thy own life's key Be checked for silence,
But never taxed for speech. What heaven more will,
That thee may furnish and my prayers pluck down,
Fall on thy head. [To Lafew.] Farewell, my lord.
'Tis an unseasoned courtier. Good my lord,
Advise him.

LAFEW  He cannot want the best that shall
Attend his love.

COUNTESS  Heaven bless him.--Farewell, Bertram.

BERTRAM  The best wishes that can be forged in your
thoughts be servants to you.	[Countess exits.]
[To Helen.] Be comfortable to my mother, your
mistress, and make much of her.

LAFEW  Farewell, pretty lady. You must hold the credit
of your father. 	[Bertram and Lafew exit.]

HELEN
O, were that all! I think not on my father,
And these great tears grace his remembrance more
Than those I shed for him. What was he like?
I have forgot him. My imagination
Carries no favor in 't but Bertram's.
I am undone. There is no living, none,
If Bertram be away. 'Twere all one
That I should love a bright particular star
And think to wed it, he is so above me.
In his bright radiance and collateral light
Must I be comforted, not in his sphere.
Th' ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
The hind that would be mated by the lion
Must die for love. 'Twas pretty, though a plague,
To see him every hour, to sit and draw
His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls
In our heart's table--heart too capable
Of every line and trick of his sweet favor.
But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancy
Must sanctify his relics. Who comes here?

[Enter Parolles.]

One that goes with him. I love him for his sake,
And yet I know him a notorious liar,
Think him a great way fool, solely a coward.
Yet these fixed evils sit so fit in him
That they take place when virtue's steely bones
Looks bleak i' th' cold wind. Withal, full oft we see
Cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.

PAROLLES  Save you, fair queen.

HELEN  And you, monarch.

PAROLLES  No.

HELEN  And no.

PAROLLES  Are you meditating on virginity?

HELEN  Ay. You have some stain of soldier in you; let
me ask you a question. Man is enemy to virginity.
How may we barricado it against him?

PAROLLES  Keep him out.

HELEN  But he assails, and our virginity, though
valiant in the defense, yet is weak. Unfold to us
some warlike resistance.

PAROLLES  There is none. Man setting down before you
will undermine you and blow you up.

HELEN  Bless our poor virginity from underminers and
blowers-up! Is there no military policy how virgins
might blow up men?

PAROLLES  Virginity being blown down, man will
quicklier be blown up. Marry, in blowing him
down again, with the breach yourselves made you
lose your city. It is not politic in the commonwealth
of nature to preserve virginity. Loss of virginity
is rational increase, and there was never
virgin got till virginity was first lost. That you
were made of is metal to make virgins. Virginity by
being once lost may be ten times found; by being
ever kept, it is ever lost. 'Tis too cold a companion.
Away with 't.

HELEN  I will stand for 't a little, though therefore I
die a virgin.

PAROLLES  There's little can be said in 't. 'Tis against the
rule of nature. To speak on the part of virginity is
to accuse your mothers, which is most infallible
disobedience. He that hangs himself is a virgin;
virginity murders itself and should be buried in
highways out of all sanctified limit as a desperate
offendress against nature. Virginity breeds mites,
much like a cheese, consumes itself to the very
paring, and so dies with feeding his own stomach.
Besides, virginity is peevish, proud, idle, made of
self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in the
canon. Keep it not; you cannot choose but lose by
't. Out with 't! Within ten year it will make itself
two, which is a goodly increase, and the principal
itself not much the worse. Away with 't!

HELEN  How might one do, sir, to lose it to her own
liking?

PAROLLES  Let me see. Marry, ill, to like him that ne'er
it likes. 'Tis a commodity will lose the gloss with
lying; the longer kept, the less worth. Off with 't
while 'tis vendible; answer the time of request. Virginity,
like an old courtier, wears her cap out of
fashion, richly suited but unsuitable, just like the
brooch and the toothpick, which wear not now.
Your date is better in your pie and your porridge
than in your cheek. And your virginity, your old
virginity, is like one of our French withered pears:
it looks ill, it eats dryly; marry, 'tis a withered pear.
It was formerly better, marry, yet 'tis a withered
pear. Will you anything with it?

HELEN  Not my virginity, yet--
There shall your master have a thousand loves,
A mother, and a mistress, and a friend,
A phoenix, captain, and an enemy,
A guide, a goddess, and a sovereign,
A counselor, a traitress, and a dear;
His humble ambition, proud humility,
His jarring concord, and his discord dulcet,
His faith, his sweet disaster, with a world
Of pretty, fond adoptious christendoms
That blinking Cupid gossips. Now shall he--
I know not what he shall. God send him well.
The court's a learning place, and he is one--

PAROLLES  What one, i' faith?

HELEN  That I wish well. 'Tis pity--

PAROLLES  What's pity?

HELEN
That wishing well had not a body in 't
Which might be felt, that we, the poorer born,
Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,
Might with effects of them follow our friends
And show what we alone must think, which never
Returns us thanks.

[Enter Page.]


PAGE  Monsieur Parolles, my lord calls for you.

PAROLLES  Little Helen, farewell. If I can remember
thee, I will think of thee at court.

HELEN  Monsieur Parolles, you were born under a
charitable star.

PAROLLES  Under Mars, I.

HELEN  I especially think under Mars.

PAROLLES  Why under Mars?

HELEN  The wars hath so kept you under that you
must needs be born under Mars.

PAROLLES  When he was predominant.

HELEN  When he was retrograde, I think rather.

PAROLLES  Why think you so?

HELEN  You go so much backward when you fight.

PAROLLES  That's for advantage.

HELEN  So is running away, when fear proposes the
safety. But the composition that your valor and
fear makes in you is a virtue of a good wing, and I
like the wear well.

PAROLLES  I am so full of businesses I cannot answer
thee acutely. I will return perfect courtier, in the
which my instruction shall serve to naturalize
thee, so thou wilt be capable of a courtier's counsel
and understand what advice shall thrust upon
thee, else thou diest in thine unthankfulness, and
thine ignorance makes thee away. Farewell. When
thou hast leisure, say thy prayers; when thou hast
none, remember thy friends. Get thee a good husband,
and use him as he uses thee. So, farewell.
[Parolles and Page exit.]

HELEN
Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie
Which we ascribe to heaven. The fated sky
Gives us free scope, only doth backward pull
Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull.
What power is it which mounts my love so high,
That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
The mightiest space in fortune nature brings
To join like likes and kiss like native things.
Impossible be strange attempts to those
That weigh their pains in sense and do suppose
What hath been cannot be. Who ever strove
To show her merit that did miss her love?
The King's disease--my project may deceive me,
But my intents are fixed and will not leave me.
[She exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Flourish cornets. Enter the King of France with letters,
two Lords, and divers Attendants.]


KING
The Florentines and Senoys are by th' ears,
Have fought with equal fortune, and continue
A braving war.

FIRST LORD  So 'tis reported, sir.

KING
Nay, 'tis most credible. We here receive it
A certainty vouched from our cousin Austria,
With caution that the Florentine will move us
For speedy aid, wherein our dearest friend
Prejudicates the business and would seem
To have us make denial.

FIRST LORD  His love and wisdom,
Approved so to your Majesty, may plead
For amplest credence.

KING  He hath armed our answer,
And Florence is denied before he comes.
Yet for our gentlemen that mean to see
The Tuscan service, freely have they leave
To stand on either part.

SECOND LORD  It well may serve
A nursery to our gentry, who are sick
For breathing and exploit.

[Enter Bertram, Lafew, and Parolles.]


KING  What's he comes here?

FIRST LORD
It is the Count Rossillion, my good lord,
Young Bertram.

KING  Youth, thou bear'st thy father's face.
Frank nature, rather curious than in haste,
Hath well composed thee. Thy father's moral parts
Mayst thou inherit too. Welcome to Paris.

BERTRAM
My thanks and duty are your Majesty's.

KING
I would I had that corporal soundness now
As when thy father and myself in friendship
First tried our soldiership. He did look far
Into the service of the time and was
Discipled of the bravest. He lasted long,
But on us both did haggish age steal on
And wore us out of act. It much repairs me
To talk of your good father. In his youth
He had the wit which I can well observe
Today in our young lords; but they may jest
Till their own scorn return to them unnoted
Ere they can hide their levity in honor.
So like a courtier, contempt nor bitterness
Were in his pride or sharpness; if they were,
His equal had awaked them, and his honor,
Clock to itself, knew the true minute when
Exception bid him speak, and at this time
His tongue obeyed his hand. Who were below him
He used as creatures of another place
And bowed his eminent top to their low ranks,
Making them proud of his humility,
In their poor praise he humbled. Such a man
Might be a copy to these younger times,
Which, followed well, would demonstrate them now
But goers backward.

BERTRAM  His good remembrance, sir,
Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb.
So in approof lives not his epitaph
As in your royal speech.

KING
Would I were with him! He would always say--
Methinks I hear him now; his plausive words
He scattered not in ears, but grafted them
To grow there and to bear. "Let me not live"--
This his good melancholy oft began
On the catastrophe and heel of pastime,
When it was out--"Let me not live," quoth he,
"After my flame lacks oil, to be the snuff
Of younger spirits, whose apprehensive senses
All but new things disdain, whose judgments are
Mere fathers of their garments, whose constancies
Expire before their fashions." This he wished.
I, after him, do after him wish too,
Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home,
I quickly were dissolved from my hive
To give some laborers room.

SECOND LORD  You're loved, sir.
They that least lend it you shall lack you first.

KING
I fill a place, I know 't.--How long is 't, count,
Since the physician at your father's died?
He was much famed.

BERTRAM  Some six months since, my lord.

KING
If he were living, I would try him yet.--
Lend me an arm.--The rest have worn me out
With several applications. Nature and sickness
Debate it at their leisure. Welcome, count.
My son's no dearer.

BERTRAM  Thank your Majesty.
[They exit. Flourish.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Countess, Steward, and Fool.]


COUNTESS  I will now hear. What say you of this
gentlewoman?

STEWARD  Madam, the care I have had to even your
content I wish might be found in the calendar of
my past endeavors, for then we wound our modesty
and make foul the clearness of our deservings
when of ourselves we publish them.

COUNTESS  What does this knave here? [To Fool.] Get
you gone, sirrah. The complaints I have heard of
you I do not all believe. 'Tis my slowness that I do
not, for I know you lack not folly to commit them
and have ability enough to make such knaveries
yours.

FOOL  'Tis not unknown to you, madam, I am a poor
fellow.

COUNTESS  Well, sir.

FOOL  No, madam, 'tis not so well that I am poor,
though many of the rich are damned. But if I may
have your Ladyship's good will to go to the world,
Isbel the woman and I will do as we may.

COUNTESS  Wilt thou needs be a beggar?

FOOL  I do beg your good will in this case.

COUNTESS  In what case?

FOOL  In Isbel's case and mine own. Service is no heritage,
and I think I shall never have the blessing of
God till I have issue o' my body, for they say bairns
are blessings.

COUNTESS  Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.

FOOL  My poor body, madam, requires it. I am driven
on by the flesh, and he must needs go that the devil
drives.

COUNTESS  Is this all your Worship's reason?

FOOL  Faith, madam, I have other holy reasons, such
as they are.

COUNTESS  May the world know them?

FOOL  I have been, madam, a wicked creature, as you
and all flesh and blood are, and indeed I do marry
that I may repent.

COUNTESS  Thy marriage sooner than thy wickedness.

FOOL  I am out o' friends, madam, and I hope to have
friends for my wife's sake.

COUNTESS  Such friends are thine enemies, knave.

FOOL  You're shallow, madam, in great friends, for the
knaves come to do that for me which I am aweary
of. He that ears my land spares my team and gives
me leave to in the crop; if I be his cuckold, he's my
drudge. He that comforts my wife is the cherisher
of my flesh and blood; he that cherishes my flesh
and blood loves my flesh and blood; he that loves
my flesh and blood is my friend. Ergo, he that
kisses my wife is my friend. If men could be contented
to be what they are, there were no fear in
marriage, for young Charbon the Puritan and old
Poysam the Papist, howsome'er their hearts are
severed in religion, their heads are both one; they
may jowl horns together like any deer i' th' herd.

COUNTESS  Wilt thou ever be a foul-mouthed and
calumnious knave?

FOOL  A prophet I, madam, and I speak the truth the
next way:
[Sings.]	For I the ballad will repeat
	   Which men full true shall find:
	Your marriage comes by destiny;
	   Your cuckoo sings by kind.

COUNTESS  Get you gone, sir. I'll talk with you more
anon.

STEWARD  May it please you, madam, that he bid Helen
come to you. Of her I am to speak.

COUNTESS  Sirrah, tell my gentlewoman I would speak
with her--Helen, I mean.

FOOL [sings]
	"Was this fair face the cause," quoth she,
	   "Why the Grecians sacked Troy?
	Fond done, done fond.
	   Was this King Priam's joy?"
	With that she sighed as she stood,
	With that she sighed as she stood,
	   And gave this sentence then:
	"Among nine bad if one be good,
	Among nine bad if one be good,
	   There's yet one good in ten."

COUNTESS  What, one good in ten? You corrupt the
song, sirrah.

FOOL  One good woman in ten, madam, which is a
purifying o' th' song. Would God would serve the
world so all the year! We'd find no fault with the
tithe-woman if I were the parson. One in ten,
quoth he? An we might have a good woman born
but or every blazing star or at an earthquake,
'twould mend the lottery well. A man may draw his
heart out ere he pluck one.

COUNTESS  You'll be gone, sir knave, and do as I command
you!

FOOL  That man should be at woman's command, and
yet no hurt done! Though honesty be no Puritan,
yet it will do no hurt; it will wear the surplice of
humility over the black gown of a big heart. I am
going, forsooth. The business is for Helen to come
hither.	[He exits.]

COUNTESS  Well, now.

STEWARD  I know, madam, you love your gentlewoman
entirely.

COUNTESS  Faith, I do. Her father bequeathed her to
me, and she herself, without other advantage, may
lawfully make title to as much love as she finds.
There is more owing her than is paid, and more
shall be paid her than she'll demand.

STEWARD  Madam, I was very late more near her than I
think she wished me. Alone she was and did communicate
to herself her own words to her own
ears; she thought, I dare vow for her, they touched
not any stranger sense. Her matter was she loved
your son. Fortune, she said, was no goddess, that
had put such difference betwixt their two estates;
Love no god, that would not extend his might only
where qualities were level; Dian no queen of virgins,
that would suffer her poor knight surprised
without rescue in the first assault or ransom afterward.
This she delivered in the most bitter touch
of sorrow that e'er I heard virgin exclaim in, which
I held my duty speedily to acquaint you withal,
sithence in the loss that may happen it concerns
you something to know it.

COUNTESS  You have discharged this honestly. Keep it
to yourself. Many likelihoods informed me of this
before, which hung so tott'ring in the balance that
I could neither believe nor misdoubt. Pray you
leave me. Stall this in your bosom, and I thank you
for your honest care. I will speak with you further
anon.	[Steward exits.]

[Enter Helen.]

[Aside.]
Even so it was with me when I was young.
   If ever we are nature's, these are ours. This thorn
Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong.
   Our blood to us, this to our blood is born.
It is the show and seal of nature's truth,
Where love's strong passion is impressed in youth.
By our remembrances of days foregone,
Such were our faults, or then we thought them none.
Her eye is sick on 't, I observe her now.

HELEN  What is your pleasure, madam?

COUNTESS
You know, Helen, I am a mother to you.

HELEN
Mine honorable mistress.

COUNTESS  Nay, a mother.
Why not a mother? When I said "a mother,"
Methought you saw a serpent. What's in "mother"
That you start at it? I say I am your mother
And put you in the catalogue of those
That were enwombed mine. 'Tis often seen
Adoption strives with nature, and choice breeds
A native slip to us from foreign seeds.
You ne'er oppressed me with a mother's groan,
Yet I express to you a mother's care.
God's mercy, maiden, does it curd thy blood
To say I am thy mother? What's the matter,
That this distempered messenger of wet,
The many-colored Iris, rounds thine eye?
Why? That you are my daughter?

HELEN  That I am not.

COUNTESS
I say I am your mother.

HELEN  Pardon, madam.
The Count Rossillion cannot be my brother.
I am from humble, he from honored name;
No note upon my parents, his all noble.
My master, my dear lord he is, and I
His servant live and will his vassal die.
He must not be my brother.

COUNTESS  Nor I your mother?

HELEN
You are my mother, madam. Would you were--
So that my lord your son were not my brother--
Indeed my mother! Or were you both our mothers,
I care no more for than I do for heaven,
So I were not his sister. Can 't no other
But, I your daughter, he must be my brother?

COUNTESS
Yes, Helen, you might be my daughter-in-law.
God shield you mean it not! "Daughter" and "mother"
So strive upon your pulse. What, pale again?
My fear hath catched your fondness! Now I see
The mystery of your loneliness and find
Your salt tears' head. Now to all sense 'tis gross:
You love my son. Invention is ashamed
Against the proclamation of thy passion
To say thou dost not. Therefore tell me true,
But tell me then 'tis so, for, look, thy cheeks
Confess it th' one to th' other, and thine eyes
See it so grossly shown in thy behaviors
That in their kind they speak it. Only sin
And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue
That truth should be suspected. Speak. Is 't so?
If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew;
If it be not, forswear 't; howe'er, I charge thee,
As heaven shall work in me for thine avail,
To tell me truly.

HELEN  Good madam, pardon me.

COUNTESS
Do you love my son?

HELEN  Your pardon, noble mistress.

COUNTESS
Love you my son?

HELEN  Do not you love him, madam?

COUNTESS
Go not about. My love hath in 't a bond
Whereof the world takes note. Come, come, disclose
The state of your affection, for your passions
Have to the full appeached.

HELEN, [kneeling]  Then I confess
Here on my knee before high heaven and you
That before you and next unto high heaven
I love your son.
My friends were poor but honest; so 's my love.
Be not offended, for it hurts not him
That he is loved of me. I follow him not
By any token of presumptuous suit,
Nor would I have him till I do deserve him,
Yet never know how that desert should be.
I know I love in vain, strive against hope,
Yet in this captious and intenible sieve
I still pour in the waters of my love
And lack not to lose still. Thus, Indian-like,
Religious in mine error, I adore
The sun that looks upon his worshipper
But knows of him no more. My dearest madam,
Let not your hate encounter with my love
For loving where you do; but if yourself,
Whose aged honor cites a virtuous youth,
Did ever in so true a flame of liking
Wish chastely and love dearly, that your Dian
Was both herself and Love, O then give pity
To her whose state is such that cannot choose
But lend and give where she is sure to lose;
That seeks not to find that her search implies,
But riddle-like lives sweetly where she dies.

COUNTESS
Had you not lately an intent--speak truly--
To go to Paris?

HELEN  Madam, I had.

COUNTESS  Wherefore?
Tell true.

HELEN, [standing]
I will tell truth, by grace itself I swear.
You know my father left me some prescriptions
Of rare and proved effects, such as his reading
And manifest experience had collected
For general sovereignty; and that he willed me
In heedfull'st reservation to bestow them
As notes whose faculties inclusive were
More than they were in note. Amongst the rest
There is a remedy, approved, set down,
To cure the desperate languishings whereof
The King is rendered lost.

COUNTESS
This was your motive for Paris, was it? Speak.

HELEN
My lord your son made me to think of this;
Else Paris, and the medicine, and the King
Had from the conversation of my thoughts
Haply been absent then.

COUNTESS  But think you, Helen,
If you should tender your supposed aid,
He would receive it? He and his physicians
Are of a mind: he that they cannot help him,
They that they cannot help. How shall they credit
A poor unlearned virgin, when the schools
Emboweled of their doctrine have left off
The danger to itself?

HELEN  There's something in 't
More than my father's skill, which was the great'st
Of his profession, that his good receipt
Shall for my legacy be sanctified
By th' luckiest stars in heaven; and would your
Honor
But give me leave to try success, I'd venture
The well-lost life of mine on his Grace's cure
By such a day, an hour.

COUNTESS  Dost thou believe 't?

HELEN  Ay, madam, knowingly.

COUNTESS
Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,
Means and attendants, and my loving greetings
To those of mine in court. I'll stay at home
And pray God's blessing into thy attempt.
Be gone tomorrow, and be sure of this:
What I can help thee to thou shalt not miss.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Flourish cornets. Enter the King, attended, with divers
young Lords, taking leave for the Florentine war;
Bertram Count Rossillion, and Parolles.]


KING
Farewell, young lords. These warlike principles
Do not throw from you.--And you, my lords,
farewell.
Share the advice betwixt you. If both gain all,
The gift doth stretch itself as 'tis received
And is enough for both.

FIRST LORD  'Tis our hope, sir,
After well-entered soldiers, to return
And find your Grace in health.

KING
No, no, it cannot be. And yet my heart
Will not confess he owes the malady
That doth my life besiege. Farewell, young lords.
Whether I live or die, be you the sons
Of worthy Frenchmen. Let higher Italy--
Those bated that inherit but the fall
Of the last monarchy--see that you come
Not to woo honor but to wed it. When
The bravest questant shrinks, find what you seek,
That fame may cry you loud. I say farewell.

FIRST LORD
Health at your bidding serve your Majesty!

KING
Those girls of Italy, take heed of them.
They say our French lack language to deny
If they demand. Beware of being captives
Before you serve.

LORDS  Our hearts receive your warnings.

KING  Farewell.--Come hither to me.
[The King speaks to Attendants, while Bertram,
Parolles, and other Lords come forward.]

FIRST LORD, [to Bertram]
O my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!

PAROLLES
'Tis not his fault, the spark.

SECOND LORD  O, 'tis brave wars.

PAROLLES
Most admirable. I have seen those wars.

BERTRAM
I am commanded here and kept a coil
With "Too young," and "The next year," and "'Tis
too early."

PAROLLES
An thy mind stand to 't, boy, steal away bravely.

BERTRAM
I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry
Till honor be bought up, and no sword worn
But one to dance with. By heaven, I'll steal away!

FIRST LORD
There's honor in the theft.

PAROLLES  Commit it, count.

SECOND LORD
I am your accessory. And so, farewell.

BERTRAM  I grow to you, and our parting is a tortured
body.

FIRST LORD  Farewell, captain.

SECOND LORD  Sweet Monsieur Parolles.

PAROLLES  Noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin.
Good sparks and lustrous, a word, good metals.
You shall find in the regiment of the Spinii one
Captain Spurio with his cicatrice, an emblem of
war, here on his sinister cheek. It was this very
sword entrenched it. Say to him I live, and observe
his reports for me.

FIRST LORD  We shall, noble captain.

PAROLLES  Mars dote on you for his novices.
[Lords exit.]
[To Bertram.] What will you do?

BERTRAM  Stay the King.

PAROLLES  Use a more spacious ceremony to the noble
lords. You have restrained yourself within the list
of too cold an adieu. Be more expressive to them,
for they wear themselves in the cap of the time;
there do muster true gait; eat, speak, and move
under the influence of the most received star, and,
though the devil lead the measure, such are to be
followed. After them, and take a more dilated
farewell.

BERTRAM  And I will do so.

PAROLLES  Worthy fellows, and like to prove most
sinewy swordmen.	[Bertram and Parolles exit.]

[Enter Lafew, to the King.]


LAFEW, [kneeling]
Pardon, my lord, for me and for my tidings.

KING  I'll fee thee to stand up.

LAFEW, [standing]
Then here's a man stands that has brought his
pardon.
I would you had kneeled, my lord, to ask me mercy,
And that at my bidding you could so stand up.

KING
I would I had, so I had broke thy pate
And asked thee mercy for 't.

LAFEW  Good faith, across.
But, my good lord, 'tis thus: will you be cured
Of your infirmity?

KING  No.

LAFEW  O, will you eat
No grapes, my royal fox? Yes, but you will
My noble grapes, an if my royal fox
Could reach them. I have seen a medicine
That's able to breathe life into a stone,
Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary
With sprightly fire and motion, whose simple touch
Is powerful to araise King Pippen, nay,
To give great Charlemagne a pen in 's hand
And write to her a love line.

KING  What "her" is this?

LAFEW
Why, Doctor She. My lord, there's one arrived,
If you will see her. Now, by my faith and honor,
If seriously I may convey my thoughts
In this my light deliverance, I have spoke
With one that in her sex, her years, profession,
Wisdom, and constancy hath amazed me more
Than I dare blame my weakness. Will you see her--
For that is her demand--and know her business?
That done, laugh well at me.

KING  Now, good Lafew,
Bring in the admiration, that we with thee
May spend our wonder too, or take off thine
By wond'ring how thou took'st it.

LAFEW  Nay, I'll fit you,
And not be all day neither.
[He goes to bring in Helen.]

KING
Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.

[Enter Helen.]


LAFEW, [to Helen]  Nay, come your ways.

KING  This haste hath wings indeed.

LAFEW  Nay, come your ways.
This is his Majesty. Say your mind to him.
A traitor you do look like, but such traitors
His Majesty seldom fears. I am Cressid's uncle
That dare leave two together. Fare you well.
[He exits.]

KING
Now, fair one, does your business follow us?

HELEN  Ay, my good lord,
Gerard de Narbon was my father,
In what he did profess well found.

KING  I knew him.

HELEN
The rather will I spare my praises towards him.
Knowing him is enough. On 's bed of death
Many receipts he gave me, chiefly one
Which, as the dearest issue of his practice,
And of his old experience th' only darling,
He bade me store up as a triple eye,
Safer than mine own two, more dear. I have so,
And hearing your high Majesty is touched
With that malignant cause wherein the honor
Of my dear father's gift stands chief in power,
I come to tender it and my appliance
With all bound humbleness.

KING  We thank you, maiden,
But may not be so credulous of cure,
When our most learned doctors leave us and
The congregated college have concluded
That laboring art can never ransom nature
From her inaidible estate. I say we must not
So stain our judgment or corrupt our hope
To prostitute our past-cure malady
To empirics, or to dissever so
Our great self and our credit to esteem
A senseless help when help past sense we deem.

HELEN
My duty, then, shall pay me for my pains.
I will no more enforce mine office on you,
Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts
A modest one to bear me back again.

KING
I cannot give thee less, to be called grateful.
Thou thought'st to help me, and such thanks I give
As one near death to those that wish him live.
But what at full I know, thou know'st no part,
I knowing all my peril, thou no art.

HELEN
What I can do can do no hurt to try
Since you set up your rest 'gainst remedy.
He that of greatest works is finisher
Oft does them by the weakest minister.
So holy writ in babes hath judgment shown
When judges have been babes. Great floods have flown
From simple sources, and great seas have dried
When miracles have by the great'st been denied.
Oft expectation fails, and most oft there
Where most it promises, and oft it hits
Where hope is coldest and despair most shifts.

KING
I must not hear thee. Fare thee well, kind maid.
Thy pains, not used, must by thyself be paid.
Proffers not took reap thanks for their reward.

HELEN
Inspired merit so by breath is barred.
It is not so with Him that all things knows
As 'tis with us that square our guess by shows;
But most it is presumption in us when
The help of heaven we count the act of men.
Dear sir, to my endeavors give consent.
Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.
I am not an impostor that proclaim
Myself against the level of mine aim,
But know I think and think I know most sure
My art is not past power nor you past cure.

KING
Art thou so confident? Within what space
Hop'st thou my cure?

HELEN  The greatest grace lending grace,
Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring;
Ere twice in murk and occidental damp
Moist Hesperus hath quenched her sleepy lamp;
Or four and twenty times the pilot's glass
Hath told the thievish minutes, how they pass,
What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly,
Health shall live free, and sickness freely die.

KING
Upon thy certainty and confidence
What dar'st thou venture?

HELEN  Tax of impudence,
A strumpet's boldness, a divulged shame;
Traduced by odious ballads, my maiden's name
Seared otherwise; nay, worse of worst, extended
With vilest torture let my life be ended.

KING
Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak
His powerful sound within an organ weak,
And what impossibility would slay
In common sense, sense saves another way.
Thy life is dear, for all that life can rate
Worth name of life in thee hath estimate:
Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all
That happiness and prime can happy call.
Thou this to hazard needs must intimate
Skill infinite or monstrous desperate.
Sweet practicer, thy physic I will try,
That ministers thine own death if I die.

HELEN
If I break time or flinch in property
Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die,
And well deserved. Not helping, death's my fee.
But if I help, what do you promise me?

KING
Make thy demand.

HELEN  But will you make it even?

KING
Ay, by my scepter and my hopes of heaven.

HELEN
Then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand
What husband in thy power I will command.
Exempted be from me the arrogance
To choose from forth the royal blood of France,
My low and humble name to propagate
With any branch or image of thy state;
But such a one, thy vassal, whom I know
Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.

KING
Here is my hand. The premises observed,
Thy will by my performance shall be served.
So make the choice of thy own time, for I,
Thy resolved patient, on thee still rely.
More should I question thee, and more I must,
Though more to know could not be more to trust:
From whence thou cam'st, how tended on; but rest
Unquestioned welcome and undoubted blessed.--
Give me some help here, ho!--If thou proceed
As high as word, my deed shall match thy deed.
[Flourish. They exit, the King assisted.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Countess and Fool.]


COUNTESS  Come on, sir. I shall now put you to the
height of your breeding.

FOOL  I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught. I
know my business is but to the court.

COUNTESS  "To the court"? Why, what place make you
special when you put off that with such contempt?
"But to the court"?

FOOL  Truly, madam, if God have lent a man any manners,
he may easily put it off at court. He that cannot
make a leg, put off 's cap, kiss his hand, and
say nothing, has neither leg, hands, lip, nor cap;
and indeed such a fellow, to say precisely, were
not for the court. But, for me, I have an answer
will serve all men.

COUNTESS  Marry, that's a bountiful answer that fits all
questions.

FOOL  It is like a barber's chair that fits all buttocks:
the pin-buttock, the quatch-buttock, the brawn-buttock,
or any buttock.

COUNTESS  Will your answer serve fit to all questions?

FOOL  As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney,
as your French crown for your taffety punk, as
Tib's rush for Tom's forefinger, as a pancake for
Shrove Tuesday, a morris for May Day, as the nail
to his hole, the cuckold to his horn, as a scolding
quean to a wrangling knave, as the nun's lip to the
friar's mouth, nay, as the pudding to his skin.

COUNTESS  Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness
for all questions?

FOOL  From below your duke to beneath your constable,
it will fit any question.

COUNTESS  It must be an answer of most monstrous
size that must fit all demands.

FOOL  But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned
should speak truth of it. Here it is, and all that
belongs to 't. Ask me if I am a courtier; it shall do
you no harm to learn.

COUNTESS  To be young again, if we could! I will be a
fool in question, hoping to be the wiser by your
answer. I pray you, sir, are you a courtier?

FOOL  O Lord, sir!--There's a simple putting off. More,
more, a hundred of them.

COUNTESS  Sir, I am a poor friend of yours that loves
you.

FOOL  O Lord, sir!--Thick, thick. Spare not me.

COUNTESS  I think, sir, you can eat none of this homely
meat.

FOOL  O Lord, sir!--Nay, put me to 't, I warrant you.

COUNTESS  You were lately whipped, sir, as I think.

FOOL  O Lord, sir!--Spare not me.

COUNTESS  Do you cry "O Lord, sir!" at your whipping,
and "spare not me"? Indeed your "O Lord, sir!" is
very sequent to your whipping. You would answer
very well to a whipping if you were but bound to 't.

FOOL  I ne'er had worse luck in my life in my "O Lord,
sir!" I see things may serve long but not serve ever.

COUNTESS  I play the noble huswife with the time to
entertain it so merrily with a fool.

FOOL  O Lord, sir!--Why, there 't serves well again.

COUNTESS, [giving him a paper]
An end, sir. To your business. Give Helen this,
And urge her to a present answer back.
Commend me to my kinsmen and my son.
This is not much.

FOOL  Not much commendation to them?

COUNTESS
Not much employment for you. You understand me.

FOOL  Most fruitfully. I am there before my legs.

COUNTESS  Haste you again.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Count Bertram, Lafew, and Parolles.]


LAFEW  They say miracles are past, and we have our
philosophical persons to make modern and familiar
things supernatural and causeless. Hence is it
that we make trifles of terrors, ensconcing ourselves
into seeming knowledge when we should
submit ourselves to an unknown fear.

PAROLLES  Why, 'tis the rarest argument of wonder that
hath shot out in our latter times.

BERTRAM  And so 'tis.

LAFEW  To be relinquished of the artists--

PAROLLES  So I say, both of Galen and Paracelsus.

LAFEW  Of all the learned and authentic fellows--

PAROLLES  Right, so I say.

LAFEW  That gave him out incurable--

PAROLLES  Why, there 'tis. So say I too.

LAFEW  Not to be helped.

PAROLLES  Right, as 'twere a man assured of a--

LAFEW  Uncertain life and sure death.

PAROLLES  Just. You say well. So would I have said.

LAFEW  I may truly say it is a novelty to the world.

PAROLLES  It is indeed. If you will have it in showing,
you shall read it in what-do-you-call there.
[He points to a paper in Lafew's hand.]

LAFEW [reads]  A showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly
actor.

PAROLLES  That's it. I would have said the very same.

LAFEW  Why, your dolphin is not lustier. 'Fore me, I
speak in respect--

PAROLLES  Nay, 'tis strange, 'tis very strange; that is the
brief and the tedious of it; and he's of a most facinorous
spirit that will not acknowledge it to be
the--

LAFEW  Very hand of heaven.

PAROLLES  Ay, so I say.

LAFEW  In a most weak--

PAROLLES  And debile minister. Great power, great
transcendence, which should indeed give us a further
use to be made than alone the recov'ry of the
King, as to be--

LAFEW  Generally thankful.

[Enter King, Helen, and Attendants.]


PAROLLES  I would have said it. You say well. Here
comes the King.

LAFEW  Lustig, as the Dutchman says. I'll like a maid
the better whilst I have a tooth in my head. Why,
he's able to lead her a coranto.

PAROLLES  Mort du vinaigre! Is not this Helen?

LAFEW  'Fore God, I think so.

KING
Go, call before me all the lords in court.
[An Attendant exits.]
Sit, my preserver, by thy patient's side,
And with this healthful hand, whose banished sense
Thou hast repealed, a second time receive
The confirmation of my promised gift,
Which but attends thy naming.

[Enter three or four Court Lords.]

Fair maid, send forth thine eye. This youthful parcel
Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing,
O'er whom both sovereign power and father's voice
I have to use. Thy frank election make.
Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.

HELEN
To each of you one fair and virtuous mistress
Fall when Love please! Marry, to each but one.

LAFEW, [aside]
I'd give bay Curtal and his furniture
My mouth no more were broken than these boys'
And writ as little beard.

KING  Peruse them well.
Not one of those but had a noble father.

HELEN  Gentlemen,
Heaven hath through me restored the King to health.

ALL
We understand it and thank heaven for you.

HELEN
I am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest
That I protest I simply am a maid.--
Please it your Majesty, I have done already.
The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me:
"We blush that thou shouldst choose; but, be
refused,
Let the white death sit on thy cheek forever;
We'll ne'er come there again."

KING  Make choice and see.
Who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.

HELEN
Now, Dian, from thy altar do I fly,
And to imperial Love, that god most high,
Do my sighs stream.	[She addresses her to a Lord.]
Sir, will you hear my suit?

FIRST COURT LORD
And grant it.

HELEN  Thanks, sir. All the
rest is mute.

LAFEW, [aside]  I had rather be in this choice than
throw ambs-ace for my life.

HELEN, [to another Lord]
The honor, sir, that flames in your fair eyes
Before I speak too threat'ningly replies.
Love make your fortunes twenty times above
Her that so wishes, and her humble love.

SECOND COURT LORD
No better, if you please.

HELEN  My wish receive,
Which great Love grant, and so I take my leave.

LAFEW, [aside]  Do all they deny her? An they were sons
of mine, I'd have them whipped, or I would send
them to th' Turk to make eunuchs of.

HELEN, [to another Lord]
Be not afraid that I your hand should take.
I'll never do you wrong, for your own sake.
Blessing upon your vows, and in your bed
Find fairer fortune if you ever wed.

LAFEW, [aside]  These boys are boys of ice; they'll none
have her. Sure they are bastards to the English;
the French ne'er got 'em.

HELEN, [to another Lord]
You are too young, too happy, and too good
To make yourself a son out of my blood.

FOURTH COURT LORD  Fair one, I think not so.

LAFEW, [aside]  There's one grape yet. I am sure thy
father drunk wine. But if thou be'st not an ass, I
am a youth of fourteen; I have known thee already.

HELEN, [to Bertram]
I dare not say I take you, but I give
Me and my service ever whilst I live
Into your guiding power.--This is the man.

KING
Why then, young Bertram, take her. She's thy wife.

BERTRAM
My wife, my liege? I shall beseech your Highness
In such a business give me leave to use
The help of mine own eyes.

KING  Know'st thou not,
Bertram,
What she has done for me?

BERTRAM  Yes, my good lord,
But never hope to know why I should marry her.

KING
Thou know'st she has raised me from my sickly bed.

BERTRAM
But follows it, my lord, to bring me down
Must answer for your raising? I know her well;
She had her breeding at my father's charge.
A poor physician's daughter my wife? Disdain
Rather corrupt me ever!

KING
'Tis only title thou disdain'st in her, the which
I can build up. Strange is it that our bloods,
Of color, weight, and heat, poured all together,
Would quite confound distinction, yet stands off
In differences so mighty. If she be
All that is virtuous, save what thou dislik'st--
"A poor physician's daughter"--thou dislik'st
Of virtue for the name. But do not so.
From lowest place whence virtuous things proceed,
The place is dignified by th' doer's deed.
Where great additions swell 's, and virtue none,
It is a dropsied honor. Good alone
Is good, without a name; vileness is so;
The property by what it is should go,
Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair;
In these to nature she's immediate heir,
And these breed honor. That is honor's scorn
Which challenges itself as honor's born
And is not like the sire. Honors thrive
When rather from our acts we them derive
Than our foregoers. The mere word's a slave
Debauched on every tomb, on every grave
A lying trophy, and as oft is dumb
Where dust and damned oblivion is the tomb
Of honored bones indeed. What should be said?
If thou canst like this creature as a maid,
I can create the rest. Virtue and she
Is her own dower, honor and wealth from me.

BERTRAM
I cannot love her, nor will strive to do 't.

KING
Thou wrong'st thyself if thou shouldst strive to
choose.

HELEN
That you are well restored, my lord, I'm glad.
Let the rest go.

KING
My honor's at the stake, which to defeat
I must produce my power.--Here, take her hand,
Proud, scornful boy, unworthy this good gift,
That dost in vile misprision shackle up
My love and her desert; that canst not dream
We, poising us in her defective scale,
Shall weigh thee to the beam; that wilt not know
It is in us to plant thine honor where
We please to have it grow. Check thy contempt;
Obey our will, which travails in thy good.
Believe not thy disdain, but presently
Do thine own fortunes that obedient right
Which both thy duty owes and our power claims,
Or I will throw thee from my care forever
Into the staggers and the careless lapse
Of youth and ignorance, both my revenge and hate
Loosing upon thee in the name of justice
Without all terms of pity. Speak. Thine answer.

BERTRAM
Pardon, my gracious lord, for I submit
My fancy to your eyes. When I consider
What great creation and what dole of honor
Flies where you bid it, I find that she which late
Was in my nobler thoughts most base is now
The praised of the King, who, so ennobled,
Is as 'twere born so.

KING  Take her by the hand,
And tell her she is thine, to whom I promise
A counterpoise, if not to thy estate,
A balance more replete.

BERTRAM  I take her hand.

KING
Good fortune and the favor of the King
Smile upon this contract, whose ceremony
Shall seem expedient on the now-born brief
And be performed tonight. The solemn feast
Shall more attend upon the coming space,
Expecting absent friends. As thou lov'st her
Thy love's to me religious; else, does err.
[They exit. Parolles and Lafew stay behind,
commenting of this wedding.]

LAFEW  Do you hear, monsieur? A word with you.

PAROLLES  Your pleasure, sir.

LAFEW  Your lord and master did well to make his
recantation.

PAROLLES  "Recantation"? My "lord"? My "master"?

LAFEW  Ay. Is it not a language I speak?

PAROLLES  A most harsh one, and not to be understood
without bloody succeeding. My "master"?

LAFEW  Are you companion to the Count Rossillion?

PAROLLES  To any count, to all counts, to what is man.

LAFEW  To what is count's man. Count's master is of
another style.

PAROLLES  You are too old, sir; let it satisfy you, you are
too old.

LAFEW  I must tell thee, sirrah, I write man, to which
title age cannot bring thee.

PAROLLES  What I dare too well do, I dare not do.

LAFEW  I did think thee, for two ordinaries, to be a
pretty wise fellow; thou didst make tolerable vent
of thy travel; it might pass. Yet the scarves and the
bannerets about thee did manifoldly dissuade me
from believing thee a vessel of too great a burden.
I have now found thee. When I lose thee again, I
care not. Yet art thou good for nothing but taking
up, and that thou 'rt scarce worth.

PAROLLES  Hadst thou not the privilege of antiquity
upon thee--

LAFEW  Do not plunge thyself too far in anger lest thou
hasten thy trial, which if--Lord have mercy on
thee for a hen! So, my good window of lattice, fare
thee well; thy casement I need not open, for I look
through thee. Give me thy hand.

PAROLLES  My lord, you give me most egregious
indignity.

LAFEW  Ay, with all my heart, and thou art worthy of it.

PAROLLES  I have not, my lord, deserved it.

LAFEW  Yes, good faith, ev'ry dram of it, and I will not
bate thee a scruple.

PAROLLES  Well, I shall be wiser.

LAFEW  Ev'n as soon as thou canst, for thou hast to
pull at a smack o' th' contrary. If ever thou be'st
bound in thy scarf and beaten, thou shalt find
what it is to be proud of thy bondage. I have a
desire to hold my acquaintance with thee, or
rather my knowledge, that I may say in the default
"He is a man I know."

PAROLLES  My lord, you do me most insupportable
vexation.

LAFEW  I would it were hell pains for thy sake, and my
poor doing eternal; for doing I am past, as I will by
thee in what motion age will give me leave.
[He exits.]

PAROLLES  Well, thou hast a son shall take this disgrace
off me. Scurvy, old, filthy, scurvy lord! Well, I must
be patient; there is no fettering of authority. I'll
beat him, by my life, if I can meet him with any
convenience, an he were double and double a lord.
I'll have no more pity of his age than I would have
of--I'll beat him, an if I could but meet him again.

[Enter Lafew.]


LAFEW  Sirrah, your lord and master's married. There's
news for you: you have a new mistress.

PAROLLES  I most unfeignedly beseech your Lordship
to make some reservation of your wrongs. He is
my good lord; whom I serve above is my master.

LAFEW  Who? God?

PAROLLES  Ay, sir.

LAFEW  The devil it is that's thy master. Why dost thou
garter up thy arms o' this fashion? Dost make hose
of thy sleeves? Do other servants so? Thou wert
best set thy lower part where thy nose stands. By
mine honor, if I were but two hours younger, I'd
beat thee. Methink'st thou art a general offense,
and every man should beat thee. I think thou wast
created for men to breathe themselves upon thee.

PAROLLES  This is hard and undeserved measure, my
lord.

LAFEW  Go to, sir. You were beaten in Italy for picking a
kernel out of a pomegranate. You are a vagabond,
and no true traveler. You are more saucy with
lords and honorable personages than the commission
of your birth and virtue gives you heraldry.
You are not worth another word; else I'd call you
knave. I leave you.	[He exits.]

PAROLLES  Good, very good! It is so, then. Good, very
good. Let it be concealed awhile.

[Enter Bertram Count Rossillion.]


BERTRAM
Undone, and forfeited to cares forever!

PAROLLES  What's the matter, sweetheart?

BERTRAM
Although before the solemn priest I have sworn,
I will not bed her.

PAROLLES  What, what, sweetheart?

BERTRAM
O my Parolles, they have married me!
I'll to the Tuscan wars and never bed her.

PAROLLES  France is a dog-hole, and it no more merits
the tread of a man's foot. To th' wars!

BERTRAM  There's letters from my mother. What th'
import is I know not yet.

PAROLLES  Ay, that would be known. To th' wars, my
boy, to th' wars!
He wears his honor in a box unseen
That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,
Spending his manly marrow in her arms
Which should sustain the bound and high curvet
Of Mars's fiery steed. To other regions!
France is a stable, we that dwell in 't jades.
Therefore, to th' war!

BERTRAM
It shall be so. I'll send her to my house,
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her
And wherefore I am fled, write to the King
That which I durst not speak. His present gift
Shall furnish me to those Italian fields
Where noble fellows strike. Wars is no strife
To the dark house and the detested wife.

PAROLLES
Will this capriccio hold in thee? Art sure?

BERTRAM
Go with me to my chamber, and advise me.
I'll send her straight away. Tomorrow
I'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.

PAROLLES
Why, these balls bound; there's noise in it. 'Tis hard.
A young man married is a man that's marred.
Therefore away, and leave her bravely. Go.
The King has done you wrong, but hush, 'tis so.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Helen with a paper, and Fool.]


HELEN  My mother greets me kindly. Is she well?

FOOL  She is not well, but yet she has her health. She's
very merry, but yet she is not well. But, thanks be
given, she's very well and wants nothing i' th' world,
but yet she is not well.

HELEN  If she be very well, what does she ail that she's
not very well?

FOOL  Truly, she's very well indeed, but for two things.

HELEN  What two things?

FOOL  One, that she's not in heaven, whither God send
her quickly; the other, that she's in Earth, from
whence God send her quickly.

[Enter Parolles.]


PAROLLES  Bless you, my fortunate lady.

HELEN  I hope, sir, I have your good will to have mine
own good fortunes.

PAROLLES  You had my prayers to lead them on, and to
keep them on have them still.--O my knave, how
does my old lady?

FOOL  So that you had her wrinkles and I her money, I
would she did as you say.

PAROLLES  Why, I say nothing.

FOOL  Marry, you are the wiser man, for many a man's
tongue shakes out his master's undoing. To say
nothing, to do nothing, to know nothing, and to
have nothing is to be a great part of your title,
which is within a very little of nothing.

PAROLLES  Away. Thou 'rt a knave.

FOOL  You should have said, sir, "Before a knave,
thou 'rt a knave"; that's "Before me, thou 'rt a
knave." This had been truth, sir.

PAROLLES  Go to. Thou art a witty fool. I have found
thee.

FOOL  Did you find me in yourself, sir, or were you
taught to find me?

PAROLLES  ...

FOOL  The search, sir, was profitable, and much fool
may you find in you, even to the world's pleasure
and the increase of laughter.

PAROLLES  A good knave, i' faith, and well fed.
Madam, my lord will go away tonight;
A very serious business calls on him.
The great prerogative and rite of love,
Which as your due time claims, he does acknowledge
But puts it off to a compelled restraint,
Whose want and whose delay is strewed with sweets,
Which they distill now in the curbed time
To make the coming hour o'erflow with joy
And pleasure drown the brim.

HELEN  What's his will else?

PAROLLES
That you will take your instant leave o' th' King
And make this haste as your own good proceeding,
Strengthened with what apology you think
May make it probable need.

HELEN  What more commands he?

PAROLLES
That, having this obtained, you presently
Attend his further pleasure.

HELEN
In everything I wait upon his will.

PAROLLES  I shall report it so.	[Parolles exits.]

HELEN, [to Fool]  I pray you, come, sirrah.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Lafew and Bertram.]


LAFEW  But I hope your Lordship thinks not him a
soldier.

BERTRAM  Yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof.

LAFEW  You have it from his own deliverance.

BERTRAM  And by other warranted testimony.

LAFEW  Then my dial goes not true. I took this lark for
a bunting.

BERTRAM  I do assure you, my lord, he is very great in
knowledge and accordingly valiant.

LAFEW  I have then sinned against his experience and
transgressed against his valor, and my state that
way is dangerous since I cannot yet find in my
heart to repent. Here he comes. I pray you make us
friends. I will pursue the amity.

[Enter Parolles.]


PAROLLES, [to Bertram]  These things shall be done, sir.

LAFEW, [to Bertram]  Pray you, sir, who's his tailor?

PAROLLES  Sir?

LAFEW  O, I know him well. Ay, sir, he, sir, 's a good
workman, a very good tailor.

BERTRAM, [aside to Parolles]  Is she gone to the King?

PAROLLES  She is.

BERTRAM  Will she away tonight?

PAROLLES  As you'll have her.

BERTRAM
I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure,
Given order for our horses, and tonight,
When I should take possession of the bride,
End ere I do begin.

LAFEW, [aside]  A good traveler is something at the latter
end of a dinner, but one that lies three thirds,
and uses a known truth to pass a thousand nothings
with, should be once heard and thrice beaten.--
God save you, captain.

BERTRAM, [to Parolles]  Is there any unkindness
between my lord and you, monsieur?

PAROLLES  I know not how I have deserved to run into
my lord's displeasure.

LAFEW  You have made shift to run into 't, boots and
spurs and all, like him that leapt into the custard;
and out of it you'll run again rather than suffer
question for your residence.

BERTRAM  It may be you have mistaken him, my lord.

LAFEW  And shall do so ever, though I took him at 's
prayers. Fare you well, my lord, and believe this of
me: there can be no kernel in this light nut. The
soul of this man is his clothes. Trust him not in
matter of heavy consequence. I have kept of them
tame and know their natures.--Farewell, monsieur.
I have spoken better of you than you have or
will to deserve at my hand, but we must do good
against evil.	[He exits.]

PAROLLES  An idle lord, I swear.

BERTRAM  I think not so.

PAROLLES  Why, do you not know him?

BERTRAM
Yes, I do know him well, and common speech
Gives him a worthy pass.

[Enter Helen.]

Here comes my clog.

HELEN
I have, sir, as I was commanded from you,
Spoke with the King and have procured his leave
For present parting. Only he desires
Some private speech with you.

BERTRAM  I shall obey his will.
You must not marvel, Helen, at my course,
Which holds not color with the time, nor does
The ministration and required office
On my particular. Prepared I was not
For such a business; therefore am I found
So much unsettled. This drives me to entreat you
That presently you take your way for home,
And rather muse than ask why I entreat you;
For my respects are better than they seem,
And my appointments have in them a need
Greater than shows itself at the first view
To you that know them not.	[Giving her a paper.]
This to my mother.
'Twill be two days ere I shall see you, so
I leave you to your wisdom.

HELEN  Sir, I can nothing say
But that I am your most obedient servant--

BERTRAM
Come, come, no more of that.

HELEN  And ever shall
With true observance seek to eke out that
Wherein toward me my homely stars have failed
To equal my great fortune.

BERTRAM  Let that go.
My haste is very great. Farewell. Hie home.

HELEN
Pray, sir, your pardon.

BERTRAM  Well, what would you say?

HELEN
I am not worthy of the wealth I owe,
Nor dare I say 'tis mine--and yet it is--
But, like a timorous thief, most fain would steal
What law does vouch mine own.

BERTRAM  What would you have?

HELEN
Something, and scarce so much; nothing, indeed.
I would not tell you what I would, my lord. Faith,
yes:
Strangers and foes do sunder and not kiss.

BERTRAM
I pray you stay not, but in haste to horse.

HELEN
I shall not break your bidding, good my lord.--
Where are my other men?--Monsieur, farewell.
[She exits.]

BERTRAM
Go thou toward home, where I will never come
Whilst I can shake my sword or hear the drum.--
Away, and for our flight.

PAROLLES  Bravely, coraggio!
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Flourish. Enter the Duke of Florence, the two French
Lords, with a troop of Soldiers.]


DUKE
So that from point to point now have you heard
The fundamental reasons of this war,
Whose great decision hath much blood let forth
And more thirsts after.

FIRST LORD  Holy seems the quarrel
Upon your Grace's part, black and fearful
On the opposer.

DUKE
Therefore we marvel much our cousin France
Would in so just a business shut his bosom
Against our borrowing prayers.

SECOND LORD  Good my lord,
The reasons of our state I cannot yield
But like a common and an outward man
That the great figure of a council frames
By self-unable motion; therefore dare not
Say what I think of it, since I have found
Myself in my incertain grounds to fail
As often as I guessed.

DUKE  Be it his pleasure.

FIRST LORD
But I am sure the younger of our nation,
That surfeit on their ease, will day by day
Come here for physic.

DUKE  Welcome shall they be,
And all the honors that can fly from us
Shall on them settle. You know your places well.
When better fall, for your avails they fell.
Tomorrow to th' field.
[Flourish. They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Countess, with a paper, and Fool.]


COUNTESS  It hath happened all as I would have had it,
save that he comes not along with her.

FOOL  By my troth, I take my young lord to be a very
melancholy man.

COUNTESS  By what observance, I pray you?

FOOL  Why, he will look upon his boot and sing, mend
the ruff and sing, ask questions and sing, pick his
teeth and sing. I know a man that had this trick of
melancholy sold a goodly manor for a song.

COUNTESS  Let me see what he writes and when he
means to come.	[She opens the letter.]

FOOL  I have no mind to Isbel since I was at court. Our
old lings and our Isbels o' th' country are nothing
like your old ling and your Isbels o' th' court. The
brains of my Cupid's knocked out, and I begin to
love as an old man loves money, with no stomach.

COUNTESS  What have we here?

FOOL  E'en that you have there.	[He exits.]

COUNTESS [reads.]  I have sent you a daughter-in-law.
She hath recovered the King and undone me. I have
wedded her, not bedded her, and sworn to make the
"not" eternal. You shall hear I am run away. Know it
before the report come. If there be breadth enough in
the world, I will hold a long distance. My duty to
you.
	Your unfortunate son,
Bertram.
This is not well, rash and unbridled boy:
To fly the favors of so good a king,
To pluck his indignation on thy head
By the misprizing of a maid too virtuous
For the contempt of empire.

[Enter Fool.]


FOOL  O madam, yonder is heavy news within, between
two soldiers and my young lady.

COUNTESS  What is the matter?

FOOL  Nay, there is some comfort in the news, some
comfort. Your son will not be killed so soon as I
thought he would.

COUNTESS  Why should he be killed?

FOOL  So say I, madam, if he run away, as I hear he
does. The danger is in standing to 't; that's the loss
of men, though it be the getting of children. Here
they come will tell you more. For my part, I only
hear your son was run away.	[He exits.]

[Enter Helen, with a paper, and two Gentlemen.]


FIRST GENTLEMAN, [to Countess]  Save you, good
madam.

HELEN
Madam, my lord is gone, forever gone.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Do not say so.

COUNTESS
Think upon patience, pray you.--Gentlemen,
I have felt so many quirks of joy and grief
That the first face of neither on the start
Can woman me unto 't. Where is my son, I pray you?

SECOND GENTLEMAN
Madam, he's gone to serve the Duke of Florence.
We met him thitherward, for thence we came,
And, after some dispatch in hand at court,
Thither we bend again.

HELEN
Look on his letter, madam; here's my passport.
[She reads.] When thou canst get the ring upon
my finger, which never shall come off, and show me
a child begotten of thy body that I am father to, then
call me husband. But in such a "then" I write a
"never."
This is a dreadful sentence.

COUNTESS
Brought you this letter, gentlemen?

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Ay, madam,
And for the contents' sake are sorry for our pains.

COUNTESS
I prithee, lady, have a better cheer.
If thou engrossest all the griefs are thine,
Thou robb'st me of a moiety. He was my son,
But I do wash his name out of my blood,
And thou art all my child.--Towards Florence is he?

SECOND GENTLEMAN  Ay, madam.

COUNTESS  And to be a soldier?

SECOND GENTLEMAN
Such is his noble purpose, and, believe 't,
The Duke will lay upon him all the honor
That good convenience claims.

COUNTESS  Return you thither?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
Ay, madam, with the swiftest wing of speed.

HELEN [reads]
Till I have no wife I have nothing in France.
'Tis bitter.

COUNTESS  Find you that there?

HELEN  Ay, madam.

FIRST GENTLEMAN
'Tis but the boldness of his hand, haply,
Which his heart was not consenting to.

COUNTESS
Nothing in France until he have no wife!
There's nothing here that is too good for him
But only she, and she deserves a lord
That twenty such rude boys might tend upon
And call her hourly mistress. Who was with him?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
A servant only, and a gentleman
Which I have sometime known.

COUNTESS  Parolles was it not?

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Ay, my good lady, he.

COUNTESS
A very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness.
My son corrupts a well-derived nature
With his inducement.

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Indeed, good lady,
The fellow has a deal of that too much
Which holds him much to have.

COUNTESS  You're welcome,
gentlemen.
I will entreat you when you see my son
To tell him that his sword can never win
The honor that he loses. More I'll entreat you
Written to bear along.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  We serve you, madam,
In that and all your worthiest affairs.

COUNTESS
Not so, but as we change our courtesies.
Will you draw near?
[She exits with the Gentlemen.]

HELEN
"Till I have no wife I have nothing in France."
Nothing in France until he has no wife.
Thou shalt have none, Rossillion, none in France.
Then hast thou all again. Poor lord, is 't I
That chase thee from thy country and expose
Those tender limbs of thine to the event
Of the none-sparing war? And is it I
That drive thee from the sportive court, where thou
Wast shot at with fair eyes, to be the mark
Of smoky muskets? O you leaden messengers
That ride upon the violent speed of fire,
Fly with false aim; move the still-'pearing air
That sings with piercing; do not touch my lord.
Whoever shoots at him, I set him there;
Whoever charges on his forward breast,
I am the caitiff that do hold him to 't;
And though I kill him not, I am the cause
His death was so effected. Better 'twere
I met the ravin lion when he roared
With sharp constraint of hunger; better 'twere
That all the miseries which nature owes
Were mine at once. No, come thou home, Rossillion,
Whence honor but of danger wins a scar,
As oft it loses all. I will be gone.
My being here it is that holds thee hence.
Shall I stay here to do 't? No, no, although
The air of paradise did fan the house
And angels officed all. I will be gone,
That pitiful rumor may report my flight
To consolate thine ear. Come, night; end, day;
For with the dark, poor thief, I'll steal away.
[She exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Flourish. Enter the Duke of Florence, Bertram Count
Rossillion, Drum and Trumpets, Soldiers, Parolles.]


DUKE, [to Bertram]
The general of our horse thou art, and we,
Great in our hope, lay our best love and credence
Upon thy promising fortune.

BERTRAM  Sir, it is
A charge too heavy for my strength, but yet
We'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake
To th' extreme edge of hazard.

DUKE  Then go thou forth,
And Fortune play upon thy prosperous helm
As thy auspicious mistress.

BERTRAM  This very day,
Great Mars, I put myself into thy file.
Make me but like my thoughts, and I shall prove
A lover of thy drum, hater of love.
[All exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Countess and Steward, with a paper.]


COUNTESS
Alas! And would you take the letter of her?
Might you not know she would do as she has done
By sending me a letter? Read it again.

STEWARD [reads the letter]
	I am Saint Jaques' pilgrim, thither gone.
	   Ambitious love hath so in me offended
	That barefoot plod I the cold ground upon,
	   With sainted vow my faults to have amended.
	Write, write, that from the bloody course of war
	   My dearest master, your dear son, may hie.
	Bless him at home in peace, whilst I from far
	   His name with zealous fervor sanctify.
	His taken labors bid him me forgive;
	   I, his despiteful Juno, sent him forth
	From courtly friends, with camping foes to live
	   Where death and danger dogs the heels of worth.
	He is too good and fair for death and me,
	Whom I myself embrace to set him free.

COUNTESS
Ah, what sharp stings are in her mildest words!
Rinaldo, you did never lack advice so much
As letting her pass so. Had I spoke with her,
I could have well diverted her intents,
Which thus she hath prevented.

STEWARD  Pardon me, madam.
If I had given you this at overnight,
She might have been o'erta'en. And yet she writes
Pursuit would be but vain.

COUNTESS  What angel shall
Bless this unworthy husband? He cannot thrive
Unless her prayers, whom heaven delights to hear
And loves to grant, reprieve him from the wrath
Of greatest justice. Write, write, Rinaldo,
To this unworthy husband of his wife.
Let every word weigh heavy of her worth
That he does weigh too light. My greatest grief,
Though little he do feel it, set down sharply.
Dispatch the most convenient messenger.
When haply he shall hear that she is gone,
He will return; and hope I may that she,
Hearing so much, will speed her foot again,
Led hither by pure love. Which of them both
Is dearest to me, I have no skill in sense
To make distinction. Provide this messenger.
My heart is heavy, and mine age is weak.
Grief would have tears, and sorrow bids me speak.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[A tucket afar off. Enter old Widow of Florence, her
daughter Diana, and Mariana, with other Citizens.]


WIDOW  Nay, come, for if they do approach the city, we
shall lose all the sight.

DIANA  They say the French count has done most honorable
service.

WIDOW  It is reported that he has taken their great'st
commander, and that with his own hand he slew
the Duke's brother. [A trumpet sounds.] We have
lost our labor. They are gone a contrary way. Hark,
you may know by their trumpets.

MARIANA  Come, let's return again and suffice ourselves
with the report of it.--Well, Diana, take heed of
this French earl. The honor of a maid is her name,
and no legacy is so rich as honesty.

WIDOW, [to Diana]  I have told my neighbor how you
have been solicited by a gentleman, his
companion.

MARIANA  I know that knave, hang him! One Parolles, a
filthy officer he is in those suggestions for the
young earl.--Beware of them, Diana. Their promises,
enticements, oaths, tokens, and all these
engines of lust are not the things they go under.
Many a maid hath been seduced by them; and
the misery is example that so terrible shows in the
wrack of maidenhood cannot for all that dissuade
succession, but that they are limed with the twigs
that threatens them. I hope I need not to advise
you further, but I hope your own grace will keep
you where you are, though there were no further
danger known but the modesty which is so lost.

DIANA  You shall not need to fear me.

WIDOW  I hope so.

[Enter Helen as a pilgrim.]

Look, here comes a pilgrim. I know she will lie at
my house; thither they send one another. I'll question
her.--God save you, pilgrim. Whither are
bound?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  To Saint Jaques le Grand.
Where do the palmers lodge, I do beseech you?

WIDOW
At the Saint Francis here beside the port.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  Is this the way?	[A march afar.]

WIDOW
Ay, marry, is 't.--Hark you, they come this way.--
If you will tarry, holy pilgrim,
But till the troops come by,
I will conduct you where you shall be lodged,
The rather for I think I know your hostess
As ample as myself.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  Is it yourself?

WIDOW  If you shall please so, pilgrim.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]
I thank you, and will stay upon your leisure.

WIDOW
You came I think from France?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  I did so.

WIDOW
Here you shall see a countryman of yours
That has done worthy service.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  His name, I pray you?

DIANA
The Count Rossillion. Know you such a one?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]
But by the ear, that hears most nobly of him.
His face I know not.

DIANA  Whatsome'er he is,
He's bravely taken here. He stole from France,
As 'tis reported, for the King had married him
Against his liking. Think you it is so?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]
Ay, surely, mere the truth. I know his lady.

DIANA
There is a gentleman that serves the Count
Reports but coarsely of her.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  What's his name?

DIANA
Monsieur Parolles.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  O, I believe with him.
In argument of praise, or to the worth
Of the great count himself, she is too mean
To have her name repeated. All her deserving
Is a reserved honesty, and that
I have not heard examined.

DIANA  Alas, poor lady,
'Tis a hard bondage to become the wife
Of a detesting lord.

WIDOW
I warrant, good creature, wheresoe'er she is,
Her heart weighs sadly. This young maid might do
her
A shrewd turn if she pleased.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  How do you mean?
Maybe the amorous count solicits her
In the unlawful purpose?

WIDOW  He does indeed,
And brokes with all that can in such a suit
Corrupt the tender honor of a maid,
But she is armed for him and keeps her guard
In honestest defense.

MARIANA
The gods forbid else!

[Drum and Colors. Enter Bertram Count Rossillion,
Parolles, and the whole Army.]


WIDOW  So, now they come.
That is Antonio, the Duke's eldest son;
That, Escalus.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  Which is the Frenchman?

DIANA  He,
That with the plume. 'Tis a most gallant fellow.
I would he loved his wife. If he were honester,
He were much goodlier. Is 't not a handsome
gentleman?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  I like him well.

DIANA
'Tis pity he is not honest. Yond's that same knave
That leads him to these places. Were I his lady,
I would poison that vile rascal.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  Which is he?

DIANA
That jackanapes with scarves. Why is he melancholy?

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  Perchance he's hurt i' th' battle.

PAROLLES  Lose our drum? Well.

MARIANA  He's shrewdly vexed at something. Look, he
has spied us.

WIDOW, [to Parolles]  Marry, hang you.

MARIANA, [to Parolles]  And your courtesy, for a
ring-carrier.
[Bertram, Parolles, and the army exit.]

WIDOW
The troop is passed. Come, pilgrim, I will bring you
Where you shall host. Of enjoined penitents
There's four or five, to Great Saint Jaques bound,
Already at my house.

HELEN, [as pilgrim]  I humbly thank you.
Please it this matron and this gentle maid
To eat with us tonight, the charge and thanking
Shall be for me. And to requite you further,
I will bestow some precepts of this virgin
Worthy the note.

BOTH  We'll take your offer kindly.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Bertram Count Rossillion and the French
Lords, as at first.]


FIRST LORD  Nay, good my lord, put him to 't. Let him
have his way.

SECOND LORD  If your Lordship find him not a hilding,
hold me no more in your respect.

FIRST LORD  On my life, my lord, a bubble.

BERTRAM  Do you think I am so far deceived in him?

FIRST LORD  Believe it, my lord. In mine own direct
knowledge, without any malice, but to speak of
him as my kinsman, he's a most notable coward,
an infinite and endless liar, an hourly promise-breaker,
the owner of no one good quality worthy
your Lordship's entertainment.

SECOND LORD  It were fit you knew him, lest, reposing
too far in his virtue, which he hath not, he might
at some great and trusty business in a main danger
fail you.

BERTRAM  I would I knew in what particular action to
try him.

SECOND LORD  None better than to let him fetch off his
drum, which you hear him so confidently undertake
to do.

FIRST LORD  I, with a troop of Florentines, will suddenly
surprise him. Such I will have whom I am sure
he knows not from the enemy. We will bind and
hoodwink him so, that he shall suppose no other
but that he is carried into the leaguer of the adversary's
when we bring him to our own tents. Be but
your Lordship present at his examination. If he do
not for the promise of his life, and in the highest
compulsion of base fear, offer to betray you and
deliver all the intelligence in his power against
you, and that with the divine forfeit of his soul
upon oath, never trust my judgment in anything.

SECOND LORD  O, for the love of laughter, let him fetch
his drum. He says he has a stratagem for 't. When
your Lordship sees the bottom of his success in
't, and to what metal this counterfeit lump of ore
will be melted, if you give him not John Drum's
entertainment, your inclining cannot be removed.
Here he comes.

[Enter Parolles.]


FIRST LORD, [aside to Bertram]  O, for the love of laughter,
hinder not the honor of his design. Let him
fetch off his drum in any hand.

BERTRAM, [to Parolles]  How now, monsieur? This
drum sticks sorely in your disposition.

SECOND LORD  A pox on 't! Let it go. 'Tis but a drum.

PAROLLES  But a drum! Is 't but a drum? A drum so
lost! There was excellent command, to charge in
with our horse upon our own wings and to rend
our own soldiers!

SECOND LORD  That was not to be blamed in the command
of the service. It was a disaster of war that
Caesar himself could not have prevented if he had
been there to command.

BERTRAM  Well, we cannot greatly condemn our success.
Some dishonor we had in the loss of that
drum, but it is not to be recovered.

PAROLLES  It might have been recovered.

BERTRAM  It might, but it is not now.

PAROLLES  It is to be recovered. But that the merit of
service is seldom attributed to the true and exact
performer, I would have that drum or another, or
hic jacet.

BERTRAM  Why, if you have a stomach, to 't, monsieur!
If you think your mystery in stratagem can bring
this instrument of honor again into his native
quarter, be magnanimous in the enterprise and go
on. I will grace the attempt for a worthy exploit. If
you speed well in it, the Duke shall both speak of it
and extend to you what further becomes his greatness,
even to the utmost syllable of your
worthiness.

PAROLLES  By the hand of a soldier, I will undertake it.

BERTRAM  But you must not now slumber in it.

PAROLLES  I'll about it this evening, and I will presently
pen down my dilemmas, encourage myself in my
certainty, put myself into my mortal preparation;
and by midnight look to hear further from me.

BERTRAM  May I be bold to acquaint his Grace you are
gone about it?

PAROLLES  I know not what the success will be, my
lord, but the attempt I vow.

BERTRAM  I know thou 'rt valiant, and to the possibility
of thy soldiership will subscribe for thee. Farewell.

PAROLLES  I love not many words.	[He exits.]

FIRST LORD  No more than a fish loves water. Is not this
a strange fellow, my lord, that so confidently seems
to undertake this business which he knows is not
to be done, damns himself to do, and dares better
be damned than to do 't?

SECOND LORD  You do not know him, my lord, as we do.
Certain it is that he will steal himself into a man's
favor and for a week escape a great deal of discoveries,
but when you find him out, you have him
ever after.

BERTRAM  Why, do you think he will make no deed at
all of this that so seriously he does address himself
unto?

FIRST LORD  None in the world, but return with an
invention and clap upon you two or three probable
lies. But we have almost embossed him. You shall
see his fall tonight; for indeed he is not for your
Lordship's respect.

SECOND LORD  We'll make you some sport with the fox
ere we case him. He was first smoked by the old
Lord Lafew. When his disguise and he is parted,
tell me what a sprat you shall find him, which you
shall see this very night.

FIRST LORD  I must go look my twigs. He shall be
caught.

BERTRAM  Your brother he shall go along with me.

FIRST LORD  As 't please your Lordship. I'll leave you.
[He exits.]

BERTRAM
Now will I lead you to the house and show you
The lass I spoke of.

SECOND LORD  But you say she's honest.

BERTRAM
That's all the fault. I spoke with her but once
And found her wondrous cold. But I sent to her,
By this same coxcomb that we have i' th' wind,
Tokens and letters, which she did re-send.
And this is all I have done. She's a fair creature.
Will you go see her?

SECOND LORD  With all my heart, my lord.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter Helen and Widow.]


HELEN
If you misdoubt me that I am not she,
I know not how I shall assure you further
But I shall lose the grounds I work upon.

WIDOW
Though my estate be fall'n, I was well born,
Nothing acquainted with these businesses,
And would not put my reputation now
In any staining act.

HELEN  Nor would I wish you.
First give me trust the Count he is my husband,
And what to your sworn counsel I have spoken
Is so from word to word; and then you cannot,
By the good aid that I of you shall borrow,
Err in bestowing it.

WIDOW  I should believe you,
For you have showed me that which well approves
You're great in fortune.

HELEN  Take this purse of gold,
And let me buy your friendly help thus far,
Which I will overpay and pay again
When I have found it. The Count he woos your
daughter,
Lays down his wanton siege before her beauty,
Resolved to carry her. Let her in fine consent
As we'll direct her how 'tis best to bear it.
Now his important blood will naught deny
That she'll demand. A ring the County wears
That downward hath succeeded in his house
From son to son some four or five descents
Since the first father wore it. This ring he holds
In most rich choice. Yet, in his idle fire,
To buy his will it would not seem too dear,
Howe'er repented after.

WIDOW
Now I see the bottom of your purpose.

HELEN
You see it lawful, then. It is no more
But that your daughter, ere she seems as won,
Desires this ring, appoints him an encounter,
In fine, delivers me to fill the time,
Herself most chastely absent. After,
To marry her, I'll add three thousand crowns
To what is passed already.

WIDOW  I have yielded.
Instruct my daughter how she shall persever
That time and place with this deceit so lawful
May prove coherent. Every night he comes
With musics of all sorts and songs composed
To her unworthiness. It nothing steads us
To chide him from our eaves, for he persists
As if his life lay on 't.

HELEN  Why then tonight
Let us assay our plot, which, if it speed,
Is wicked meaning in a lawful deed,
And lawful meaning in a lawful act,
Where both not sin, and yet a sinful fact.
But let's about it.
[They exit.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter one of the French Lords, with five or six other
Soldiers in ambush.]


LORD  He can come no other way but by this hedge
corner. When you sally upon him, speak what terrible
language you will. Though you understand it
not yourselves, no matter. For we must not seem to
understand him, unless some one among us whom
we must produce for an interpreter.

FIRST SOLDIER  Good captain, let me be th' interpreter.

LORD  Art not acquainted with him? Knows he not thy
voice?

FIRST SOLDIER  No, sir, I warrant you.

LORD  But what linsey-woolsey hast thou to speak to
us again?

FIRST SOLDIER  E'en such as you speak to me.

LORD  He must think us some band of strangers i' th'
adversary's entertainment. Now, he hath a smack
of all neighboring languages. Therefore we must
every one be a man of his own fancy, not to know
what we speak one to another. So we seem to know
is to know straight our purpose: choughs' language,
gabble enough and good enough. As for
you, interpreter, you must seem very politic. But
couch, ho! Here he comes to beguile two hours in
a sleep and then to return and swear the lies he
forges.	[They move aside.]

[Enter Parolles.]


PAROLLES  Ten o'clock. Within these three hours 'twill
be time enough to go home. What shall I say I have
done? It must be a very plausive invention that
carries it. They begin to smoke me, and disgraces
have of late knocked too often at my door. I find
my tongue is too foolhardy, but my heart hath the
fear of Mars before it, and of his creatures, not
daring the reports of my tongue.

LORD, [aside]  This is the first truth that e'er thine own
tongue was guilty of.

PAROLLES  What the devil should move me to undertake
the recovery of this drum, being not ignorant
of the impossibility and knowing I had no such
purpose? I must give myself some hurts and say I
got them in exploit. Yet slight ones will not carry it.
They will say "Came you off with so little?" And
great ones I dare not give. Wherefore? What's the
instance? Tongue, I must put you into a butter-woman's
mouth and buy myself another of
Bajazeth's mule if you prattle me into these perils.

LORD, [aside]  Is it possible he should know what he is,
and be that he is?

PAROLLES  I would the cutting of my garments would
serve the turn, or the breaking of my Spanish
sword.

LORD, [aside]  We cannot afford you so.

PAROLLES  Or the baring of my beard, and to say it was
in stratagem.

LORD, [aside]  'Twould not do.

PAROLLES  Or to drown my clothes and say I was
stripped.

LORD, [aside]  Hardly serve.

PAROLLES  Though I swore I leapt from the window of
the citadel--

LORD, [aside]  How deep?

PAROLLES  Thirty fathom.

LORD, [aside]  Three great oaths would scarce make
that be believed.

PAROLLES  I would I had any drum of the enemy's. I
would swear I recovered it.

LORD, [aside]  You shall hear one anon.

PAROLLES  A drum, now, of the enemy's--
[Alarum within.]

LORD, [advancing]  Throca movousus, cargo, cargo,
cargo.

ALL  Cargo, cargo, cargo, villianda par corbo, cargo.
[They seize him.]

PAROLLES  O ransom, ransom! Do not hide mine eyes.
[They blindfold him.]

FIRST SOLDIER  Boskos thromuldo boskos.

PAROLLES
I know you are the Muskos' regiment,
And I shall lose my life for want of language.
If there be here German or Dane, Low Dutch,
Italian, or French, let him speak to me.
I'll discover that which shall undo the Florentine.

FIRST SOLDIER  Boskos vauvado, I understand thee and
can speak thy tongue. Kerelybonto, sir, betake thee
to thy faith, for seventeen poniards are at thy
bosom.

PAROLLES  O!

FIRST SOLDIER  O, pray, pray, pray! Manka reuania
dulche.

LORD  Oscorbidulchos voliuorco.

FIRST SOLDIER
The General is content to spare thee yet
And, hoodwinked as thou art, will lead thee on
To gather from thee. Haply thou mayst inform
Something to save thy life.

PAROLLES  O, let me live,
And all the secrets of our camp I'll show,
Their force, their purposes. Nay, I'll speak that
Which you will wonder at.

FIRST SOLDIER  But wilt thou faithfully?

PAROLLES  If I do not, damn me.

FIRST SOLDIER  Acordo linta. Come on, thou art
granted space.
[He exits with Parolles under guard.]
[A short alarum within.]

LORD
Go tell the Count Rossillion and my brother
We have caught the woodcock and will keep him
muffled
Till we do hear from them.

SECOND SOLDIER  Captain, I will.

LORD
He will betray us all unto ourselves.
Inform on that.

SECOND SOLDIER  So I will, sir.

LORD
Till then I'll keep him dark and safely locked.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Bertram and the maid called Diana.]


BERTRAM
They told me that your name was Fontibell.

DIANA
No, my good lord, Diana.

BERTRAM  Titled goddess,
And worth it, with addition. But, fair soul,
In your fine frame hath love no quality?
If the quick fire of youth light not your mind,
You are no maiden but a monument.
When you are dead, you should be such a one
As you are now, for you are cold and stern,
And now you should be as your mother was
When your sweet self was got.

DIANA
She then was honest.

BERTRAM  So should you be.

DIANA  No.
My mother did but duty--such, my lord,
As you owe to your wife.

BERTRAM  No more o' that.
I prithee do not strive against my vows.
I was compelled to her, but I love thee
By love's own sweet constraint, and will forever
Do thee all rights of service.

DIANA  Ay, so you serve us
Till we serve you. But when you have our roses,
You barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves
And mock us with our bareness.

BERTRAM  How have I sworn!

DIANA
'Tis not the many oaths that makes the truth,
But the plain single vow that is vowed true.
What is not holy, that we swear not by,
But take the high'st to witness. Then pray you, tell
me,
If I should swear by Jove's great attributes
I loved you dearly, would you believe my oaths
When I did love you ill? This has no holding
To swear by him whom I protest to love
That I will work against him. Therefore your oaths
Are words, and poor conditions but unsealed,
At least in my opinion.

BERTRAM  Change it, change it.
Be not so holy-cruel. Love is holy,
And my integrity ne'er knew the crafts
That you do charge men with. Stand no more off,
But give thyself unto my sick desires,
Who then recovers. Say thou art mine, and ever
My love as it begins shall so persever.

DIANA
I see that men may rope 's in such a snare
That we'll forsake ourselves. Give me that ring.

BERTRAM
I'll lend it thee, my dear, but have no power
To give it from me.

DIANA  Will you not, my lord?

BERTRAM
It is an honor 'longing to our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
In me to lose.

DIANA  Mine honor's such a ring.
My chastity's the jewel of our house,
Bequeathed down from many ancestors,
Which were the greatest obloquy i' th' world
In me to lose. Thus your own proper wisdom
Brings in the champion Honor on my part
Against your vain assault.

BERTRAM  Here, take my ring.
My house, mine honor, yea, my life be thine,
And I'll be bid by thee.

DIANA
When midnight comes, knock at my chamber
window.
I'll order take my mother shall not hear.
Now will I charge you in the band of truth,
When you have conquered my yet maiden bed,
Remain there but an hour, nor speak to me.
My reasons are most strong, and you shall know them
When back again this ring shall be delivered.
And on your finger in the night I'll put
Another ring, that what in time proceeds
May token to the future our past deeds.
Adieu till then; then, fail not. You have won
A wife of me, though there my hope be done.

BERTRAM
A heaven on Earth I have won by wooing thee.

DIANA
For which live long to thank both heaven and me!
You may so in the end.	[He exits.]
My mother told me just how he would woo
As if she sat in 's heart. She says all men
Have the like oaths. He had sworn to marry me
When his wife's dead. Therefore I'll lie with him
When I am buried. Since Frenchmen are so braid,
Marry that will, I live and die a maid.
Only, in this disguise I think 't no sin
To cozen him that would unjustly win.
[She exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter the two French Lords and some two
or three Soldiers.]


FIRST LORD  You have not given him his mother's
letter?

SECOND LORD  I have delivered it an hour since. There
is something in 't that stings his nature, for on the
reading it he changed almost into another man.

FIRST LORD  He has much worthy blame laid upon him
for shaking off so good a wife and so sweet a lady.

SECOND LORD  Especially he hath incurred the everlasting
displeasure of the King, who had even tuned
his bounty to sing happiness to him. I will tell you
a thing, but you shall let it dwell darkly with you.

FIRST LORD  When you have spoken it, 'tis dead, and I
am the grave of it.

SECOND LORD  He hath perverted a young gentlewoman
here in Florence of a most chaste renown,
and this night he fleshes his will in the spoil of her
honor. He hath given her his monumental ring and
thinks himself made in the unchaste composition.

FIRST LORD  Now God delay our rebellion! As we are
ourselves, what things are we!

SECOND LORD  Merely our own traitors. And, as in the
common course of all treasons we still see them
reveal themselves till they attain to their abhorred
ends, so he that in this action contrives against his
own nobility, in his proper stream o'erflows
himself.

FIRST LORD  Is it not meant damnable in us to be trumpeters
of our unlawful intents? We shall not, then,
have his company tonight?

SECOND LORD  Not till after midnight, for he is dieted to
his hour.

FIRST LORD  That approaches apace. I would gladly
have him see his company anatomized, that he
might take a measure of his own judgments
wherein so curiously he had set this counterfeit.

SECOND LORD  We will not meddle with him till he
come, for his presence must be the whip of the
other.

FIRST LORD  In the meantime, what hear you of these
wars?

SECOND LORD  I hear there is an overture of peace.

FIRST LORD  Nay, I assure you, a peace concluded.

SECOND LORD  What will Count Rossillion do then?
Will he travel higher or return again into France?

FIRST LORD  I perceive by this demand you are not altogether
of his counsel.

SECOND LORD  Let it be forbid, sir! So should I be a
great deal of his act.

FIRST LORD  Sir, his wife some two months since fled
from his house. Her pretense is a pilgrimage to
Saint Jaques le Grand, which holy undertaking
with most austere sanctimony she accomplished.
And, there residing, the tenderness of her nature
became as a prey to her grief; in fine, made a groan
of her last breath, and now she sings in heaven.

SECOND LORD  How is this justified?

FIRST LORD  The stronger part of it by her own letters,
which makes her story true even to the point of her
death. Her death itself, which could not be her
office to say is come, was faithfully confirmed by
the rector of the place.

SECOND LORD  Hath the Count all this intelligence?

FIRST LORD  Ay, and the particular confirmations, point
from point, to the full arming of the verity.

SECOND LORD  I am heartily sorry that he'll be glad of
this.

FIRST LORD  How mightily sometimes we make us
comforts of our losses.

SECOND LORD  And how mightily some other times we
drown our gain in tears. The great dignity that his
valor hath here acquired for him shall at home be
encountered with a shame as ample.

FIRST LORD  The web of our life is of a mingled yarn,
good and ill together. Our virtues would be proud
if our faults whipped them not, and our crimes
would despair if they were not cherished by our
virtues.

[Enter a Servant.]

How now? Where's your master?

SERVANT  He met the Duke in the street, sir, of whom
he hath taken a solemn leave. His Lordship will
next morning for France. The Duke hath offered
him letters of commendations to the King.

SECOND LORD  They shall be no more than needful
there, if they were more than they can commend.
They cannot be too sweet for the King's tartness.

[Enter Bertram Count Rossillion.]

Here's his Lordship now.--How now, my lord? Is 't
not after midnight?

BERTRAM  I have tonight dispatched sixteen businesses,
a month's length apiece. By an abstract of
success: I have congeed with the Duke, done my
adieu with his nearest, buried a wife, mourned for
her, writ to my lady mother I am returning, entertained
my convoy, and between these main parcels
of dispatch effected many nicer needs. The last
was the greatest, but that I have not ended yet.

SECOND LORD  If the business be of any difficulty, and
this morning your departure hence, it requires
haste of your Lordship.

BERTRAM  I mean the business is not ended as fearing
to hear of it hereafter. But shall we have this dialogue
between the Fool and the Soldier? Come,
bring forth this counterfeit module; has deceived
me like a double-meaning prophesier.

SECOND LORD  Bring him forth. Has sat i' th' stocks all
night, poor gallant knave.	[Soldiers exit.]

BERTRAM  No matter. His heels have deserved it in
usurping his spurs so long. How does he carry
himself?

SECOND LORD  I have told your Lordship already: the
stocks carry him. But to answer you as you would
be understood: he weeps like a wench that had
shed her milk. He hath confessed himself to Morgan,
whom he supposes to be a friar, from the time
of his remembrance to this very instant disaster of
his setting i' th' stocks. And what think you he hath
confessed?

BERTRAM  Nothing of me, has he?

SECOND LORD  His confession is taken, and it shall be
read to his face. If your Lordship be in 't, as I
believe you are, you must have the patience to
hear it.

[Enter Parolles, blindfolded, with his Interpreter,
the First Soldier.]


BERTRAM  A plague upon him! Muffled! He can say
nothing of me.

FIRST LORD, [aside to Bertram]  Hush, hush. Hoodman
comes.--Portotartarossa.

FIRST SOLDIER, [to Parolles]  He calls for the tortures.
What will you say without 'em?

PAROLLES  I will confess what I know without constraint.
If you pinch me like a pasty, I can say no
more.

FIRST SOLDIER  Bosko Chimurcho.

FIRST LORD  Boblibindo chicurmurco.

FIRST SOLDIER  You are a merciful general.--Our general
bids you answer to what I shall ask you out of a
note.

PAROLLES  And truly, as I hope to live.

FIRST SOLDIER, [as if reading a note]  First, demand of
him how many horse the Duke is strong.--What say
you to that?

PAROLLES  Five or six thousand, but very weak and
unserviceable. The troops are all scattered, and the
commanders very poor rogues, upon my reputation
and credit, and as I hope to live.

FIRST SOLDIER  Shall I set down your answer so?

PAROLLES  Do. I'll take the Sacrament on 't, how and
which way you will.

BERTRAM, [aside]  All's one to him. What a past-saving
slave is this!

FIRST LORD, [aside to Bertram]  You're deceived, my
lord. This is Monsieur Parolles, the gallant
militarist--that was his own phrase--that had the
whole theoric of war in the knot of his scarf, and
the practice in the chape of his dagger.

SECOND LORD, [aside]  I will never trust a man again for
keeping his sword clean, nor believe he can have
everything in him by wearing his apparel neatly.

FIRST SOLDIER, [to Parolles]  Well, that's set down.

PAROLLES  "Five or six thousand horse," I said--I will
say true--"or thereabouts" set down, for I'll speak
truth.

FIRST LORD, [aside]  He's very near the truth in this.

BERTRAM, [aside]  But I con him no thanks for 't, in the
nature he delivers it.

PAROLLES  "Poor rogues," I pray you say.

FIRST SOLDIER  Well, that's set down.

PAROLLES  I humbly thank you, sir. A truth's a truth.
The rogues are marvelous poor.

FIRST SOLDIER, [as if reading a note]  Demand of him of
what strength they are o' foot.--What say you to
that?

PAROLLES  By my troth, sir, if I were to live but this
present hour, I will tell true. Let me see: Spurio a
hundred and fifty, Sebastian so many, Corambus
so many, Jaques so many; Guiltian, Cosmo,
Lodowick and Gratii, two hundred fifty each; mine
own company, Chitopher, Vaumond, Bentii, two
hundred fifty each; so that the muster-file, rotten
and sound, upon my life amounts not to fifteen
thousand poll, half of the which dare not shake the
snow from off their cassocks lest they shake themselves
to pieces.

BERTRAM, [aside]  What shall be done to him?

FIRST LORD, [aside]  Nothing but let him have thanks.
[(Aside to First Soldier.)] Demand of him my condition
and what credit I have with the Duke.

FIRST SOLDIER, [to Parolles]  Well, that's set down. [Pretending
to read:] You shall demand of him whether
one Captain Dumaine be i' th' camp, a Frenchman;
what his reputation is with the Duke, what his valor,
honesty, and expertness in wars; or whether he
thinks it were not possible with well-weighing sums
of gold to corrupt him to a revolt.--What say you to
this? What do you know of it?

PAROLLES  I beseech you let me answer to the particular
of the inter'gatories. Demand them singly.

FIRST SOLDIER  Do you know this Captain Dumaine?

PAROLLES  I know him. He was a botcher's prentice in
Paris, from whence he was whipped for getting the
shrieve's fool with child, a dumb innocent that
could not say him nay.

BERTRAM, [aside to First Lord]  Nay, by your leave, hold
your hands, though I know his brains are forfeit to
the next tile that falls.

FIRST SOLDIER  Well, is this captain in the Duke of
Florence's camp?

PAROLLES  Upon my knowledge he is, and lousy.

FIRST LORD, [aside to Bertram]  Nay, look not so upon
me. We shall hear of your Lordship anon.

FIRST SOLDIER  What is his reputation with the Duke?

PAROLLES  The Duke knows him for no other but a
poor officer of mine, and writ to me this other day
to turn him out o' th' band. I think I have his letter
in my pocket.

FIRST SOLDIER  Marry, we'll search.
[They search Parolles' pockets.]

PAROLLES  In good sadness, I do not know. Either it is
there, or it is upon a file with the Duke's other letters
in my tent.

FIRST SOLDIER  Here 'tis; here's a paper. Shall I read it to
you?

PAROLLES  I do not know if it be it or no.

BERTRAM, [aside]  Our interpreter does it well.

FIRST LORD, [aside]  Excellently.

FIRST SOLDIER [reads]  Dian, the Count's a fool and full
of gold--

PAROLLES  That is not the Duke's letter, sir. That is an
advertisement to a proper maid in Florence, one
Diana, to take heed of the allurement of one Count
Rossillion, a foolish idle boy, but for all that very
ruttish. I pray you, sir, put it up again.

FIRST SOLDIER  Nay, I'll read it first, by your favor.

PAROLLES  My meaning in 't, I protest, was very honest
in the behalf of the maid, for I knew the young
count to be a dangerous and lascivious boy, who is
a whale to virginity and devours up all the fry it
finds.

BERTRAM, [aside]  Damnable both-sides rogue!

FIRST SOLDIER [reads]
	When he swears oaths, bid him drop gold, and
take it.
	   After he scores, he never pays the score.
	Half won is match well made. Match, and well
make it.
	   He ne'er pays after-debts. Take it before.
	And say a soldier, Dian, told thee this:
	Men are to mell with; boys are not to kiss.
	For count of this: the Count's a fool, I know it,
	Who pays before, but not when he does owe it.
	Thine, as he vowed to thee in thine ear,
Parolles.

BERTRAM, [aside]  He shall be whipped through the
army with this rhyme in 's forehead.

SECOND LORD, [aside]  This is your devoted friend, sir,
the manifold linguist and the armipotent soldier.

BERTRAM, [aside]  I could endure anything before but a
cat, and now he's a cat to me.

FIRST SOLDIER, [to Parolles]  I perceive, sir, by our
general's looks we shall be fain to hang you.

PAROLLES  My life, sir, in any case! Not that I am afraid
to die, but that, my offenses being many, I would
repent out the remainder of nature. Let me live,
sir, in a dungeon, i' th' stocks, or anywhere, so I
may live.

FIRST SOLDIER  We'll see what may be done, so you confess
freely. Therefore once more to this Captain
Dumaine: you have answered to his reputation
with the Duke, and to his valor. What is his
honesty?

PAROLLES  He will steal, sir, an egg out of a cloister. For
rapes and ravishments, he parallels Nessus. He
professes not keeping of oaths. In breaking 'em he
is stronger than Hercules. He will lie, sir, with such
volubility that you would think truth were a fool.
Drunkenness is his best virtue, for he will be
swine-drunk, and in his sleep he does little harm,
save to his bedclothes about him; but they know
his conditions and lay him in straw. I have but
little more to say, sir, of his honesty; he has everything
that an honest man should not have; what an
honest man should have, he has nothing.

FIRST LORD, [aside]  I begin to love him for this.

BERTRAM, [aside]  For this description of thine honesty?
A pox upon him! For me, he's more and more
a cat.

FIRST SOLDIER  What say you to his expertness in war?

PAROLLES  Faith, sir, has led the drum before the English
tragedians. To belie him I will not, and more
of his soldiership I know not, except in that country
he had the honor to be the officer at a place
there called Mile End, to instruct for the doubling
of files. I would do the man what honor I can, but
of this I am not certain.

FIRST LORD, [aside]  He hath out-villained villainy so
far that the rarity redeems him.

BERTRAM, [aside]  A pox on him! He's a cat still.

FIRST SOLDIER  His qualities being at this poor price,
I need not to ask you if gold will corrupt him to
revolt.

PAROLLES  Sir, for a cardecu he will sell the fee-simple
of his salvation, the inheritance of it, and cut th'
entail from all remainders, and a perpetual succession
for it perpetually.

FIRST SOLDIER  What's his brother, the other Captain
Dumaine?

SECOND LORD, [aside]  Why does he ask him of me?

FIRST SOLDIER  What's he?

PAROLLES  E'en a crow o' th' same nest: not altogether
so great as the first in goodness, but greater a great
deal in evil. He excels his brother for a coward, yet
his brother is reputed one of the best that is. In a
retreat he outruns any lackey. Marry, in coming on
he has the cramp.

FIRST SOLDIER  If your life be saved, will you undertake
to betray the Florentine?

PAROLLES  Ay, and the captain of his horse, Count
Rossillion.

FIRST SOLDIER  I'll whisper with the General and know
his pleasure.

PAROLLES, [aside]  I'll no more drumming. A plague of
all drums! Only to seem to deserve well, and to
beguile the supposition of that lascivious young
boy the Count, have I run into this danger. Yet who
would have suspected an ambush where I was
taken?

FIRST SOLDIER  There is no remedy, sir, but you must
die. The General says you that have so traitorously
discovered the secrets of your army and made
such pestiferous reports of men very nobly held
can serve the world for no honest use. Therefore
you must die.--Come, headsman, off with his
head.

PAROLLES  O Lord, sir, let me live, or let me see my
death!

FIRST SOLDIER  That shall you, and take your leave of
all your friends. [He removes the blindfold.] So,
look about you. Know you any here?

BERTRAM  Good morrow, noble captain.

SECOND LORD  God bless you, Captain Parolles.

FIRST LORD  God save you, noble captain.

SECOND LORD  Captain, what greeting will you to my
Lord Lafew? I am for France.

FIRST LORD  Good captain, will you give me a copy of
the sonnet you writ to Diana in behalf of the Count
Rossillion? An I were not a very coward, I'd compel
it of you. But fare you well.
[Bertram and Lords exit.]

FIRST SOLDIER  You are undone, captain--all but your
scarf; that has a knot on 't yet.

PAROLLES  Who cannot be crushed with a plot?

FIRST SOLDIER  If you could find out a country where
but women were that had received so much
shame, you might begin an impudent nation. Fare
you well, sir. I am for France too. We shall speak of
you there.	[He exits.]

PAROLLES
Yet am I thankful. If my heart were great,
'Twould burst at this. Captain I'll be no more,
But I will eat and drink, and sleep as soft
As captain shall. Simply the thing I am
Shall make me live. Who knows himself a braggart,
Let him fear this, for it will come to pass
That every braggart shall be found an ass.
Rust, sword; cool, blushes; and Parolles live
Safest in shame. Being fooled, by fool'ry thrive.
There's place and means for every man alive.
I'll after them.	[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Helen, Widow, and Diana.]


HELEN
That you may well perceive I have not wronged you,
One of the greatest in the Christian world
Shall be my surety, 'fore whose throne 'tis needful,
Ere I can perfect mine intents, to kneel.
Time was, I did him a desired office
Dear almost as his life, which gratitude
Through flinty Tartar's bosom would peep forth
And answer thanks. I duly am informed
His Grace is at Marseilles, to which place
We have convenient convoy. You must know
I am supposed dead. The army breaking,
My husband hies him home, where, heaven aiding
And by the leave of my good lord the King,
We'll be before our welcome.

WIDOW  Gentle madam,
You never had a servant to whose trust
Your business was more welcome.

HELEN  Nor you, mistress,
Ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labor
To recompense your love. Doubt not but heaven
Hath brought me up to be your daughter's dower,
As it hath fated her to be my motive
And helper to a husband. But O, strange men,
That can such sweet use make of what they hate
When saucy trusting of the cozened thoughts
Defiles the pitchy night! So lust doth play
With what it loathes for that which is away.
But more of this hereafter.--You, Diana,
Under my poor instructions yet must suffer
Something in my behalf.

DIANA  Let death and honesty
Go with your impositions, I am yours
Upon your will to suffer.

HELEN  Yet, I pray you--
But with the word "The time will bring on summer,"
When briers shall have leaves as well as thorns
And be as sweet as sharp. We must away.
Our wagon is prepared, and time revives us.
All's well that ends well. Still the fine's the crown.
Whate'er the course, the end is the renown.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Fool, Countess, and Lafew.]


LAFEW  No, no, no, your son was misled with a
snipped-taffeta fellow there, whose villainous saffron
would have made all the unbaked and doughy
youth of a nation in his color. Your daughter-in-law
had been alive at this hour, and your son here
at home, more advanced by the King than by that
red-tailed humble-bee I speak of.

COUNTESS  I would I had not known him. It was the
death of the most virtuous gentlewoman that ever
nature had praise for creating. If she had partaken
of my flesh and cost me the dearest groans of a
mother, I could not have owed her a more rooted
love.

LAFEW  'Twas a good lady, 'twas a good lady. We may
pick a thousand salads ere we light on such another
herb.

FOOL  Indeed, sir, she was the sweet marjoram of the
salad, or rather the herb of grace.

LAFEW  They are not herbs, you knave. They are
nose-herbs.

FOOL  I am no great Nebuchadnezzar, sir. I have not
much skill in grass.

LAFEW  Whether dost thou profess thyself, a knave or a
fool?

FOOL  A fool, sir, at a woman's service, and a knave at a
man's.

LAFEW  Your distinction?

FOOL  I would cozen the man of his wife and do his
service.

LAFEW  So you were a knave at his service indeed.

FOOL  And I would give his wife my bauble, sir, to do
her service.

LAFEW  I will subscribe for thee, thou art both knave
and fool.

FOOL  At your service.

LAFEW  No, no, no.

FOOL  Why, sir, if I cannot serve you, I can serve as
great a prince as you are.

LAFEW  Who's that, a Frenchman?

FOOL  Faith, sir, he has an English name, but his
phys'nomy is more hotter in France than there.

LAFEW  What prince is that?

FOOL  The black prince, sir, alias the prince of darkness,
alias the devil.

LAFEW, [giving him money]  Hold thee, there's my
purse. I give thee not this to suggest thee from thy
master thou talk'st of. Serve him still.

FOOL  I am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a
great fire, and the master I speak of ever keeps a
good fire. But sure he is the prince of the world; let
his Nobility remain in 's court. I am for the house
with the narrow gate, which I take to be too little
for pomp to enter. Some that humble themselves
may, but the many will be too chill and tender, and
they'll be for the flow'ry way that leads to the
broad gate and the great fire.

LAFEW  Go thy ways. I begin to be aweary of thee. And
I tell thee so before because I would not fall out
with thee. Go thy ways. Let my horses be well
looked to, without any tricks.

FOOL  If I put any tricks upon 'em, sir, they shall be
jades' tricks, which are their own right by the law
of nature.	[He exits.]

LAFEW  A shrewd knave and an unhappy.

COUNTESS  So he is. My lord that's gone made himself
much sport out of him. By his authority he
remains here, which he thinks is a patent for his
sauciness, and indeed he has no pace, but runs
where he will.

LAFEW  I like him well. 'Tis not amiss. And I was about
to tell you, since I heard of the good lady's death
and that my lord your son was upon his return
home, I moved the King my master to speak in the
behalf of my daughter, which in the minority of
them both his Majesty out of a self-gracious
remembrance did first propose. His Highness hath
promised me to do it, and to stop up the displeasure
he hath conceived against your son there is
no fitter matter. How does your Ladyship like it?

COUNTESS  With very much content, my lord, and I
wish it happily effected.

LAFEW  His Highness comes post from Marseilles, of
as able body as when he numbered thirty. He will
be here tomorrow, or I am deceived by him that in
such intelligence hath seldom failed.

COUNTESS  It rejoices me that, I hope, I shall see him
ere I die. I have letters that my son will be here
tonight. I shall beseech your Lordship to remain
with me till they meet together.

LAFEW  Madam, I was thinking with what manners I
might safely be admitted.

COUNTESS  You need but plead your honorable
privilege.

LAFEW  Lady, of that I have made a bold charter. But I
thank my God it holds yet.

[Enter Fool.]


FOOL  O madam, yonder's my lord your son with a
patch of velvet on 's face. Whether there be a scar
under 't or no, the velvet knows, but 'tis a goodly
patch of velvet. His left cheek is a cheek of two pile
and a half, but his right cheek is worn bare.

LAFEW  A scar nobly got, or a noble scar, is a good liv'ry
of honor. So belike is that.

FOOL  But it is your carbonadoed face.

LAFEW  Let us go see your son, I pray you. I long to talk
with the young noble soldier.

FOOL  'Faith, there's a dozen of 'em, with delicate fine
hats, and most courteous feathers which bow the
head and nod at every man.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Helen, Widow, and Diana, with two Attendants.]


HELEN
But this exceeding posting day and night
Must wear your spirits low. We cannot help it.
But since you have made the days and nights as one
To wear your gentle limbs in my affairs,
Be bold you do so grow in my requital
As nothing can unroot you.

[Enter a Gentleman, a gentle Astringer.]

In happy time!
This man may help me to his Majesty's ear,
If he would spend his power.--God save you, sir.

GENTLEMAN  And you.

HELEN
Sir, I have seen you in the court of France.

GENTLEMAN  I have been sometimes there.

HELEN
I do presume, sir, that you are not fall'n
From the report that goes upon your goodness,
And therefore, goaded with most sharp occasions
Which lay nice manners by, I put you to
The use of your own virtues, for the which
I shall continue thankful.

GENTLEMAN  What's your will?

HELEN, [taking out a paper]  That it will please you
To give this poor petition to the King
And aid me with that store of power you have
To come into his presence.

GENTLEMAN
The King's not here.

HELEN  Not here, sir?

GENTLEMAN  Not indeed.
He hence removed last night, and with more haste
Than is his use.

WIDOW  Lord, how we lose our pains!

HELEN  All's well that ends well yet,
Though time seem so adverse and means unfit.--
I do beseech you, whither is he gone?

GENTLEMAN
Marry, as I take it, to Rossillion,
Whither I am going.

HELEN, [giving him the paper]  I do beseech you, sir,
Since you are like to see the King before me,
Commend the paper to his gracious hand,
Which I presume shall render you no blame
But rather make you thank your pains for it.
I will come after you with what good speed
Our means will make us means.

GENTLEMAN  This I'll do for you.

HELEN
And you shall find yourself to be well thanked
Whate'er falls more. We must to horse again.--
Go, go, provide.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Fool and Parolles.]


PAROLLES, [holding out a paper]  Good Monsieur
Lavatch, give my lord Lafew this letter. I have ere
now, sir, been better known to you, when I have
held familiarity with fresher clothes. But I am
now, sir, muddied in Fortune's mood, and smell
somewhat strong of her strong displeasure.

FOOL  Truly, Fortune's displeasure is but sluttish if it
smell so strongly as thou speak'st of. I will henceforth
eat no fish of Fortune's butt'ring. Prithee,
allow the wind.

PAROLLES  Nay, you need not to stop your nose, sir. I
spake but by a metaphor.

FOOL  Indeed, sir, if your metaphor stink I will stop my
nose, or against any man's metaphor. Prithee, get
thee further.

PAROLLES  Pray you, sir, deliver me this paper.

FOOL  Foh! Prithee, stand away. A paper from Fortune's
close-stool, to give to a nobleman!

[Enter Lafew.]

Look, here he comes himself.--Here is a purr of
Fortune's, sir, or of Fortune's cat--but not a
musk-cat--that has fall'n into the unclean fishpond
of her displeasure and, as he says, is muddied
withal. Pray you, sir, use the carp as you may,
for he looks like a poor, decayed, ingenious, foolish,
rascally knave. I do pity his distress in my
smiles of comfort, and leave him to your Lordship.
[He exits.]

PAROLLES  My lord, I am a man whom Fortune hath
cruelly scratched.

LAFEW  And what would you have me to do? 'Tis too
late to pare her nails now. Wherein have you
played the knave with Fortune that she should
scratch you, who of herself is a good lady and
would not have knaves thrive long under her?
There's a cardecu for you. Let the justices make
you and Fortune friends. I am for other business.

PAROLLES  I beseech your Honor to hear me one single
word.

LAFEW  You beg a single penny more. Come, you shall
ha 't. Save your word.

PAROLLES  My name, my good lord, is Parolles.

LAFEW  You beg more than a word, then. Cock's my
passion; give me your hand. How does your drum?

PAROLLES  O my good lord, you were the first that
found me.

LAFEW  Was I, in sooth? And I was the first that lost
thee.

PAROLLES  It lies in you, my lord, to bring me in some
grace, for you did bring me out.

LAFEW  Out upon thee, knave! Dost thou put upon me
at once both the office of God and the devil? One
brings thee in grace, and the other brings thee out.
[Trumpets sound.] The King's coming. I know by
his trumpets. Sirrah, inquire further after me. I
had talk of you last night. Though you are a fool
and a knave, you shall eat. Go to, follow.

PAROLLES  I praise God for you.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Flourish. Enter King, Countess, Lafew, the two French
Lords, with Attendants.]


KING
We lost a jewel of her, and our esteem
Was made much poorer by it. But your son,
As mad in folly, lacked the sense to know
Her estimation home.

COUNTESS  'Tis past, my liege,
And I beseech your Majesty to make it
Natural rebellion done i' th' blade of youth,
When oil and fire, too strong for reason's force,
O'erbears it and burns on.

KING  My honored lady,
I have forgiven and forgotten all,
Though my revenges were high bent upon him
And watched the time to shoot.

LAFEW  This I must say--
But first I beg my pardon: the young lord
Did to his Majesty, his mother, and his lady
Offense of mighty note, but to himself
The greatest wrong of all. He lost a wife
Whose beauty did astonish the survey
Of richest eyes, whose words all ears took captive,
Whose dear perfection hearts that scorned to serve
Humbly called mistress.

KING  Praising what is lost
Makes the remembrance dear. Well, call him hither.
We are reconciled, and the first view shall kill
All repetition. Let him not ask our pardon.
The nature of his great offense is dead,
And deeper than oblivion we do bury
Th' incensing relics of it. Let him approach
A stranger, no offender, and inform him
So 'tis our will he should.

GENTLEMAN  I shall, my liege.	[He exits.]

KING
What says he to your daughter? Have you spoke?

LAFEW
All that he is hath reference to your Highness.

KING
Then shall we have a match. I have letters sent me
That sets him high in fame.

[Enter Count Bertram.]


LAFEW  He looks well on 't.

KING  I am not a day of season,
For thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail
In me at once. But to the brightest beams
Distracted clouds give way. So stand thou forth.
The time is fair again.

BERTRAM  My high-repented blames,
Dear sovereign, pardon to me.

KING  All is whole.
Not one word more of the consumed time.
Let's take the instant by the forward top,
For we are old, and on our quick'st decrees
Th' inaudible and noiseless foot of time
Steals ere we can effect them. You remember
The daughter of this lord?

BERTRAM  Admiringly, my liege. At first
I stuck my choice upon her, ere my heart
Durst make too bold a herald of my tongue;
Where the impression of mine eye infixing,
Contempt his scornful perspective did lend me,
Which warped the line of every other favor,
Scorned a fair color or expressed it stol'n,
Extended or contracted all proportions
To a most hideous object. Thence it came
That she whom all men praised and whom myself,
Since I have lost, have loved, was in mine eye
The dust that did offend it.

KING  Well excused.
That thou didst love her strikes some scores away
From the great compt. But love that comes too late,
Like a remorseful pardon slowly carried,
To the great sender turns a sour offense,
Crying "That's good that's gone!" Our rash faults
Make trivial price of serious things we have,
Not knowing them until we know their grave.
Oft our displeasures, to ourselves unjust,
Destroy our friends and after weep their dust.
Our own love, waking, cries to see what's done,
While shameful hate sleeps out the afternoon.
Be this sweet Helen's knell, and now forget her.
Send forth your amorous token for fair Maudlin.
The main consents are had, and here we'll stay
To see our widower's second marriage day.

COUNTESS
Which better than the first, O dear heaven, bless,
Or, ere they meet, in me, O nature, cesse!

LAFEW
Come on, my son, in whom my house's name
Must be digested, give a favor from you
To sparkle in the spirits of my daughter,
That she may quickly come.
[Bertram gives him a ring.]
By my old beard
And ev'ry hair that's on 't, Helen that's dead
Was a sweet creature. Such a ring as this,
The last that e'er I took her leave at court,
I saw upon her finger.

BERTRAM  Hers it was not.

KING
Now, pray you, let me see it, for mine eye,
While I was speaking, oft was fastened to 't.
[Lafew passes the ring to the King.]
This ring was mine, and when I gave it Helen,
I bade her if her fortunes ever stood
Necessitied to help, that by this token
I would relieve her. [To Bertram.] Had you that craft to
reave her
Of what should stead her most?

BERTRAM  My gracious
sovereign,
Howe'er it pleases you to take it so,
The ring was never hers.

COUNTESS  Son, on my life,
I have seen her wear it, and she reckoned it
At her life's rate.

LAFEW  I am sure I saw her wear it.

BERTRAM
You are deceived, my lord. She never saw it.
In Florence was it from a casement thrown me,
Wrapped in a paper which contained the name
Of her that threw it. Noble she was, and thought
I stood ungaged, but when I had subscribed
To mine own fortune and informed her fully
I could not answer in that course of honor
As she had made the overture, she ceased
In heavy satisfaction and would never
Receive the ring again.

KING  Plutus himself,
That knows the tinct and multiplying med'cine,
Hath not in nature's mystery more science
Than I have in this ring. 'Twas mine, 'twas Helen's,
Whoever gave it you. Then if you know
That you are well acquainted with yourself,
Confess 'twas hers and by what rough enforcement
You got it from her. She called the saints to surety
That she would never put it from her finger
Unless she gave it to yourself in bed,
Where you have never come, or sent it us
Upon her great disaster.

BERTRAM  She never saw it.

KING
Thou speak'st it falsely, as I love mine honor,
And mak'st conjectural fears to come into me
Which I would fain shut out. If it should prove
That thou art so inhuman--'twill not prove so,
And yet I know not. Thou didst hate her deadly,
And she is dead, which nothing but to close
Her eyes myself could win me to believe
More than to see this ring.--Take him away.
My forepast proofs, howe'er the matter fall,
Shall tax my fears of little vanity,
Having vainly feared too little. Away with him.
We'll sift this matter further.

BERTRAM  If you shall prove
This ring was ever hers, you shall as easy
Prove that I husbanded her bed in Florence,
Where yet she never was.	[He exits, under guard.]

KING
I am wrapped in dismal thinkings.

[Enter a Gentleman.]


GENTLEMAN  Gracious sovereign,
Whether I have been to blame or no, I know not.
[He gives the King a paper.]
Here's a petition from a Florentine
Who hath for four or five removes come short
To tender it herself. I undertook it,
Vanquished thereto by the fair grace and speech
Of the poor suppliant, who, by this, I know
Is here attending. Her business looks in her
With an importing visage, and she told me,
In a sweet verbal brief, it did concern
Your Highness with herself.

KING [reads]  Upon his many protestations to marry me
when his wife was dead, I blush to say it, he won
me. Now is the Count Rossillion a widower, his
vows are forfeited to me and my honor's paid to him.
He stole from Florence, taking no leave, and I follow
him to his country for justice. Grant it me, O king.
In you it best lies. Otherwise a seducer flourishes,
and a poor maid is undone.
Diana Capilet.

LAFEW  I will buy me a son-in-law in a fair, and toll for
this. I'll none of him.

KING
The heavens have thought well on thee, Lafew,
To bring forth this discov'ry.--Seek these suitors.
Go speedily, and bring again the Count.
[Gentleman and Attendants exit.]
I am afeard the life of Helen, lady,
Was foully snatched.

COUNTESS  Now justice on the doers!

[Enter Bertram under guard.]


KING
I wonder, sir, since wives are monsters to you
And that you fly them as you swear them lordship,
Yet you desire to marry.

[Enter Widow and Diana.]

What woman's that?

DIANA
I am, my lord, a wretched Florentine,
Derived from the ancient Capilet.
My suit, as I do understand, you know
And therefore know how far I may be pitied.

WIDOW
I am her mother, sir, whose age and honor
Both suffer under this complaint we bring,
And both shall cease without your remedy.

KING
Come hither, count. Do you know these women?

BERTRAM
My lord, I neither can nor will deny
But that I know them. Do they charge me further?

DIANA
Why do you look so strange upon your wife?

BERTRAM
She's none of mine, my lord.

DIANA  If you shall marry,
You give away this hand, and that is mine;
You give away heaven's vows, and those are mine;
You give away myself, which is known mine,
For I by vow am so embodied yours
That she which marries you must marry me,
Either both or none.

LAFEW, [to Bertram]  Your reputation comes too short
for my daughter. You are no husband for her.

BERTRAM, [to the King]
My lord, this is a fond and desp'rate creature
Whom sometime I have laughed with. Let your
Highness
Lay a more noble thought upon mine honor
Than for to think that I would sink it here.

KING
Sir, for my thoughts, you have them ill to friend
Till your deeds gain them. Fairer prove your honor
Than in my thought it lies.

DIANA  Good my lord,
Ask him upon his oath if he does think
He had not my virginity.

KING
What sayst thou to her?

BERTRAM  She's impudent, my lord,
And was a common gamester to the camp.

DIANA
He does me wrong, my lord. If I were so,
He might have bought me at a common price.
Do not believe him. O, behold this ring,
Whose high respect and rich validity
Did lack a parallel. Yet for all that
He gave it to a commoner o' th' camp,
If I be one.

COUNTESS  He blushes, and 'tis hit.
Of six preceding ancestors that gem,
Conferred by testament to th' sequent issue,
Hath it been owed and worn. This is his wife.
That ring's a thousand proofs.

KING, [to Diana]  Methought you said
You saw one here in court could witness it.

DIANA
I did, my lord, but loath am to produce
So bad an instrument. His name's Parolles.

LAFEW
I saw the man today, if man he be.

KING
Find him, and bring him hither.	[Attendant exits.]

BERTRAM  What of him?
He's quoted for a most perfidious slave,
With all the spots o' th' world taxed and debauched,
Whose nature sickens but to speak a truth.
Am I or that or this for what he'll utter,
That will speak anything?

KING  She hath that ring of yours.

BERTRAM
I think she has. Certain it is I liked her
And boarded her i' th' wanton way of youth.
She knew her distance and did angle for me,
Madding my eagerness with her restraint,
As all impediments in fancy's course
Are motives of more fancy; and in fine
Her infinite cunning with her modern grace
Subdued me to her rate. She got the ring,
And I had that which any inferior might
At market price have bought.

DIANA  I must be patient.
You that have turned off a first so noble wife
May justly diet me. I pray you yet--
Since you lack virtue, I will lose a husband--
Send for your ring. I will return it home,
And give me mine again.

BERTRAM  I have it not.

KING, [to Diana]  What ring was yours, I pray you?

DIANA
Sir, much like the same upon your finger.

KING
Know you this ring? This ring was his of late.

DIANA
And this was it I gave him, being abed.

KING
The story, then, goes false you threw it him
Out of a casement?

DIANA  I have spoke the truth.

[Enter Parolles.]


BERTRAM
My lord, I do confess the ring was hers.

KING
You boggle shrewdly. Every feather starts you.--
Is this the man you speak of?

DIANA  Ay, my lord.

KING
Tell me, sirrah--but tell me true, I charge you,
Not fearing the displeasure of your master,
Which, on your just proceeding, I'll keep off--
By him and by this woman here what know you?

PAROLLES  So please your Majesty, my master hath
been an honorable gentleman. Tricks he hath had
in him which gentlemen have.

KING  Come, come, to th' purpose. Did he love this
woman?

PAROLLES  Faith, sir, he did love her, but how?

KING  How, I pray you?

PAROLLES  He did love her, sir, as a gentleman loves a
woman.

KING  How is that?

PAROLLES  He loved her, sir, and loved her not.

KING  As thou art a knave and no knave. What an
equivocal companion is this!

PAROLLES  I am a poor man, and at your Majesty's
command.

LAFEW  He's a good drum, my lord, but a naughty
orator.

DIANA  Do you know he promised me marriage?

PAROLLES  Faith, I know more than I'll speak.

KING  But wilt thou not speak all thou know'st?

PAROLLES  Yes, so please your Majesty. I did go
between them, as I said; but more than that he
loved her, for indeed he was mad for her, and
talked of Satan and of limbo and of furies and I
know not what. Yet I was in that credit with them
at that time, that I knew of their going to bed and
of other motions, as promising her marriage, and
things which would derive me ill will to speak of.
Therefore I will not speak what I know.

KING  Thou hast spoken all already, unless thou canst
say they are married. But thou art too fine in thy
evidence. Therefore stand aside.
[To Diana.]
This ring you say was yours?

DIANA  Ay, my good lord.

KING
Where did you buy it? Or who gave it you?

DIANA
It was not given me, nor I did not buy it.

KING
Who lent it you?

DIANA  It was not lent me neither.

KING
Where did you find it then?

DIANA  I found it not.

KING
If it were yours by none of all these ways,
How could you give it him?

DIANA  I never gave it him.

LAFEW  This woman's an easy glove, my lord; she goes
off and on at pleasure.

KING
This ring was mine. I gave it his first wife.

DIANA
It might be yours or hers for aught I know.

KING, [to Attendants]
Take her away. I do not like her now.
To prison with her, and away with him.--
Unless thou tell'st me where thou hadst this ring,
Thou diest within this hour.

DIANA  I'll never tell you.

KING
Take her away.

DIANA  I'll put in bail, my liege.

KING
I think thee now some common customer.

DIANA, [to Bertram]
By Jove, if ever I knew man, 'twas you.

KING
Wherefore hast thou accused him all this while?

DIANA
Because he's guilty and he is not guilty.
He knows I am no maid, and he'll swear to 't.
I'll swear I am a maid, and he knows not.
Great king, I am no strumpet. By my life,
I am either maid or else this old man's wife.

KING
She does abuse our ears. To prison with her.

DIANA
Good mother, fetch my bail. [Widow exits.] Stay,
royal sir.
The jeweler that owes the ring is sent for,
And he shall surety me. But for this lord
Who hath abused me as he knows himself,
Though yet he never harmed me, here I quit him.
He knows himself my bed he hath defiled,
And at that time he got his wife with child.
Dead though she be, she feels her young one kick.
So there's my riddle: one that's dead is quick.
And now behold the meaning.

[Enter Helen and Widow.]


KING  Is there no exorcist
Beguiles the truer office of mine eyes?
Is 't real that I see?

HELEN  No, my good lord,
'Tis but the shadow of a wife you see,
The name and not the thing.

BERTRAM  Both, both. O, pardon!

HELEN
O, my good lord, when I was like this maid,
I found you wondrous kind. There is your ring,
And, look you, here's your letter. [She takes out a
paper.] This it says:
When from my finger you can get this ring
And are by me with child, etc. This is done.
Will you be mine now you are doubly won?

BERTRAM
If she, my liege, can make me know this clearly,
I'll love her dearly, ever, ever dearly.

HELEN
If it appear not plain and prove untrue,
Deadly divorce step between me and you.--
O my dear mother, do I see you living?

LAFEW
Mine eyes smell onions. I shall weep anon.--
[To Parolles.] Good Tom Drum, lend me a handkercher.
So, I thank thee. Wait on me home.
I'll make sport with thee. Let thy courtesies alone.
They are scurvy ones.

KING
Let us from point to point this story know,
To make the even truth in pleasure flow.
[To Diana.] If thou be'st yet a fresh uncropped flower,
Choose thou thy husband, and I'll pay thy dower.
For I can guess that by thy honest aid
Thou kept'st a wife herself, thyself a maid.
Of that and all the progress more and less,
Resolvedly more leisure shall express.
All yet seems well, and if it end so meet,
The bitter past, more welcome is the sweet.
[Flourish.]

EPILOGUE
========

The King's a beggar, now the play is done.
All is well ended if this suit be won,
That you express content, which we will pay,
With strift to please you, day exceeding day.
Ours be your patience, then, and yours our parts.
Your gentle hands lend us, and take our hearts.
[All exit.]
Antony and Cleopatra
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/antony-and-cleopatra/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
ANTONY, a triumvir of Rome
CLEOPATRA, Queen of Egypt
OCTAVIUS CAESAR, a triumvir of Rome
OCTAVIA, sister to Caesar, later wife to Antony
LEPIDUS, a triumvir of Rome
ENOBARBUS, also called DOMITIUS
Accompanying Antony in Egypt and elsewhere:
  VENTIDIUS
  SILIUS
  EROS
  CANIDIUS
  SCARUS
  DERCETUS
  DEMETRIUS
  PHILO
  A SCHOOLMASTER, Antony's AMBASSADOR to Caesar
Serving in Cleopatra's court:
  CHARMIAN
  IRAS
  ALEXAS
  MARDIAN, a Eunuch
  SELEUCUS, Cleopatra's treasurer
  DIOMEDES
Supporting and accompanying Caesar:
  MAECENAS
  AGRIPPA
  TAURUS
  THIDIAS
  DOLABELLA
  GALLUS
  PROCULEIUS
SEXTUS POMPEIUS, also called POMPEY
MENAS
MENECRATES
VARRIUS
MESSENGERS
SOLDIERS
SENTRIES
GUARDSMEN
A SOOTHSAYER
SERVANTS
A BOY
A CAPTAIN
AN EGYPTIAN
A COUNTRYMAN
Ladies, Eunuchs, Captains, Officers, Soldiers, Attendants, Servants (Lamprius, Rannius, Lucillius: mute characters named in the opening stage direction to 1.2)


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Demetrius and Philo.]


PHILO
Nay, but this dotage of our general's
O'erflows the measure. Those his goodly eyes,
That o'er the files and musters of the war
Have glowed like plated Mars, now bend, now turn
The office and devotion of their view
Upon a tawny front. His captain's heart,
Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst
The buckles on his breast, reneges all temper
And is become the bellows and the fan
To cool a gypsy's lust.

[Flourish. Enter Antony, Cleopatra, her Ladies, the Train,
with Eunuchs fanning her.]

Look where they come.
Take but good note, and you shall see in him
The triple pillar of the world transformed
Into a strumpet's fool. Behold and see.

CLEOPATRA
If it be love indeed, tell me how much.

ANTONY
There's beggary in the love that can be reckoned.

CLEOPATRA
I'll set a bourn how far to be beloved.

ANTONY
Then must thou needs find out new heaven, new
Earth.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER  News, my good lord, from Rome.

ANTONY  Grates me, the sum.

CLEOPATRA  Nay, hear them, Antony.
Fulvia perchance is angry. Or who knows
If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent
His powerful mandate to you: "Do this, or this;
Take in that kingdom, and enfranchise that.
Perform 't, or else we damn thee."

ANTONY  How, my love?

CLEOPATRA  Perchance? Nay, and most like.
You must not stay here longer; your dismission
Is come from Caesar. Therefore hear it, Antony.
Where's Fulvia's process? Caesar's, I would say--
both?
Call in the messengers. As I am Egypt's queen,
Thou blushest, Antony, and that blood of thine
Is Caesar's homager; else so thy cheek pays shame
When shrill-tongued Fulvia scolds. The messengers!

ANTONY
Let Rome in Tiber melt and the wide arch
Of the ranged empire fall. Here is my space.
Kingdoms are clay. Our dungy earth alike
Feeds beast as man. The nobleness of life
Is to do thus; when such a mutual pair
And such a twain can do 't, in which I bind,
On pain of punishment, the world to weet
We stand up peerless.

CLEOPATRA  Excellent falsehood!
Why did he marry Fulvia and not love her?
I'll seem the fool I am not. Antony
Will be himself.

ANTONY  But stirred by Cleopatra.
Now for the love of Love and her soft hours,
Let's not confound the time with conference harsh.
There's not a minute of our lives should stretch
Without some pleasure now. What sport tonight?

CLEOPATRA
Hear the ambassadors.

ANTONY  Fie, wrangling queen,
Whom everything becomes--to chide, to laugh,
To weep; whose every passion fully strives
To make itself, in thee, fair and admired!
No messenger but thine, and all alone
Tonight we'll wander through the streets and note
The qualities of people. Come, my queen,
Last night you did desire it. [To the Messenger.]
Speak not to us.
[Antony and Cleopatra exit with the Train.]

DEMETRIUS
Is Caesar with Antonius prized so slight?

PHILO
Sir, sometimes when he is not Antony
He comes too short of that great property
Which still should go with Antony.

DEMETRIUS  I am full sorry
That he approves the common liar who
Thus speaks of him at Rome; but I will hope
Of better deeds tomorrow. Rest you happy!
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Enobarbus, Lamprius, a Soothsayer, Rannius,
Lucillius, Charmian, Iras, Mardian the Eunuch, Alexas,
and Servants.]


CHARMIAN  Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, most anything
Alexas, almost most absolute Alexas, where's the
soothsayer that you praised so to th' Queen? O, that
I knew this husband which you say must charge
his horns with garlands!

ALEXAS  Soothsayer!

SOOTHSAYER  Your will?

CHARMIAN
Is this the man?--Is 't you, sir, that know things?

SOOTHSAYER
In nature's infinite book of secrecy
A little I can read.

ALEXAS, [to Charmian]  Show him your hand.

ENOBARBUS, [to Servants]
Bring in the banquet quickly, wine enough
Cleopatra's health to drink.

CHARMIAN, [giving her hand to the Soothsayer]  Good sir,
give me good fortune.

SOOTHSAYER  I make not, but foresee.

CHARMIAN  Pray then, foresee me one.

SOOTHSAYER
You shall be yet far fairer than you are.

CHARMIAN  He means in flesh.

IRAS  No, you shall paint when you are old.

CHARMIAN  Wrinkles forbid!

ALEXAS  Vex not his prescience. Be attentive.

CHARMIAN  Hush.

SOOTHSAYER
You shall be more beloving than beloved.

CHARMIAN  I had rather heat my liver with drinking.

ALEXAS  Nay, hear him.

CHARMIAN  Good now, some excellent fortune! Let me
be married to three kings in a forenoon and widow
them all. Let me have a child at fifty to whom Herod
of Jewry may do homage. Find me to marry me
with Octavius Caesar, and companion me with my
mistress.

SOOTHSAYER
You shall outlive the lady whom you serve.

CHARMIAN  O, excellent! I love long life better than figs.

SOOTHSAYER
You have seen and proved a fairer former fortune
Than that which is to approach.

CHARMIAN  Then belike my children shall have no
names. Prithee, how many boys and wenches must
I have?

SOOTHSAYER
If every of your wishes had a womb,
And fertile every wish, a million.

CHARMIAN  Out, fool! I forgive thee for a witch.

ALEXAS  You think none but your sheets are privy to
your wishes.

CHARMIAN, [to Soothsayer]  Nay, come. Tell Iras hers.

ALEXAS  We'll know all our fortunes.

ENOBARBUS  Mine, and most of our fortunes tonight,
shall be--drunk to bed.

IRAS, [giving her hand to the Soothsayer]  There's a palm
presages chastity, if nothing else.

CHARMIAN  E'en as the o'erflowing Nilus presageth
famine.

IRAS  Go, you wild bedfellow, you cannot soothsay.

CHARMIAN  Nay, if an oily palm be not a fruitful prognostication,
I cannot scratch mine ear.--Prithee
tell her but a workaday fortune.

SOOTHSAYER  Your fortunes are alike.

IRAS  But how, but how? Give me particulars.

SOOTHSAYER  I have said.

IRAS  Am I not an inch of fortune better than she?

CHARMIAN  Well, if you were but an inch of fortune
better than I, where would you choose it?

IRAS  Not in my husband's nose.

CHARMIAN  Our worser thoughts heavens mend. Alexas--
come, his fortune, his fortune! O, let him marry a
woman that cannot go, sweet Isis, I beseech thee, and
let her die, too, and give him a worse, and let worse
follow worse, till the worst of all follow him laughing
to his grave, fiftyfold a cuckold. Good Isis, hear me
this prayer, though thou deny me a matter of more
weight, good Isis, I beseech thee!

IRAS  Amen, dear goddess, hear that prayer of the
people. For, as it is a heartbreaking to see a handsome
man loose-wived, so it is a deadly sorrow to
behold a foul knave uncuckolded. Therefore, dear
Isis, keep decorum and fortune him accordingly.

CHARMIAN  Amen.

ALEXAS  Lo now, if it lay in their hands to make me a
cuckold, they would make themselves whores but
they'd do 't.

ENOBARBUS  Hush, here comes Antony.

CHARMIAN  Not he. The Queen.

[Enter Cleopatra.]


CLEOPATRA  Saw you my lord?

ENOBARBUS  No, lady.

CLEOPATRA  Was he not here?

CHARMIAN  No, madam.

CLEOPATRA
He was disposed to mirth, but on the sudden
A Roman thought hath struck him.--Enobarbus!

ENOBARBUS  Madam?

CLEOPATRA
Seek him and bring him hither.--Where's Alexas?

ALEXAS
Here at your service. My lord approaches.

[Enter Antony with a Messenger.]


CLEOPATRA
We will not look upon him. Go with us.
[All but Antony and the Messenger exit.]

MESSENGER
Fulvia thy wife first came into the field.

ANTONY  Against my brother Lucius?

MESSENGER  Ay.
But soon that war had end, and the time's state
Made friends of them, jointing their force 'gainst
Caesar,
Whose better issue in the war from Italy
Upon the first encounter drave them.

ANTONY  Well, what worst?

MESSENGER
The nature of bad news infects the teller.

ANTONY
When it concerns the fool or coward. On.
Things that are past are done, with me. 'Tis thus:
Who tells me true, though in his tale lie death,
I hear him as he flattered.

MESSENGER  Labienus--
This is stiff news--hath with his Parthian force
Extended Asia: from Euphrates
His conquering banner shook, from Syria
To Lydia and to Ionia,
Whilst--

ANTONY  "Antony," thou wouldst say?

MESSENGER  O, my lord!

ANTONY
Speak to me home; mince not the general tongue.
Name Cleopatra as she is called in Rome;
Rail thou in Fulvia's phrase, and taunt my faults
With such full license as both truth and malice
Have power to utter. O, then we bring forth weeds
When our quick winds lie still, and our ills told us
Is as our earing. Fare thee well awhile.

MESSENGER  At your noble pleasure.	[Messenger exits.]

[Enter another Messenger.]


ANTONY
From Sicyon how the news? Speak there.

SECOND MESSENGER
The man from Sicyon--

ANTONY  Is there such an one?

SECOND MESSENGER
He stays upon your will.

ANTONY  Let him appear.
[Second Messenger exits.]
These strong Egyptian fetters I must break,
Or lose myself in dotage.

[Enter another Messenger with a letter.]

What are you?

THIRD MESSENGER
Fulvia thy wife is dead.

ANTONY  Where died she?

THIRD MESSENGER  In Sicyon.
Her length of sickness, with what else more serious
Importeth thee to know, this bears.
[He hands Antony the letter.]

ANTONY  Forbear me.
[Third Messenger exits.]
There's a great spirit gone! Thus did I desire it.
What our contempts doth often hurl from us,
We wish it ours again. The present pleasure,
By revolution lowering, does become
The opposite of itself. She's good, being gone.
The hand could pluck her back that shoved her on.
I must from this enchanting queen break off.
Ten thousand harms more than the ills I know
My idleness doth hatch.--How now, Enobarbus!

[Enter Enobarbus.]


ENOBARBUS  What's your pleasure, sir?

ANTONY  I must with haste from hence.

ENOBARBUS  Why then we kill all our women. We see
how mortal an unkindness is to them. If they suffer
our departure, death's the word.

ANTONY  I must be gone.

ENOBARBUS  Under a compelling occasion, let women
die. It were pity to cast them away for nothing,
though between them and a great cause, they
should be esteemed nothing. Cleopatra, catching
but the least noise of this, dies instantly. I have seen
her die twenty times upon far poorer moment. I do
think there is mettle in death which commits some
loving act upon her, she hath such a celerity in
dying.

ANTONY  She is cunning past man's thought.

ENOBARBUS  Alack, sir, no, her passions are made of
nothing but the finest part of pure love. We cannot
call her winds and waters sighs and tears; they are
greater storms and tempests than almanacs can
report. This cannot be cunning in her; if it be, she
makes a shower of rain as well as Jove.

ANTONY  Would I had never seen her!

ENOBARBUS  O, sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful
piece of work, which not to have been blest
withal would have discredited your travel.

ANTONY  Fulvia is dead.

ENOBARBUS  Sir?

ANTONY  Fulvia is dead.

ENOBARBUS  Fulvia?

ANTONY  Dead.

ENOBARBUS  Why, sir, give the gods a thankful sacrifice.
When it pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a
man from him, it shows to man the tailors of the
Earth; comforting therein, that when old robes are
worn out, there are members to make new. If there
were no more women but Fulvia, then had you
indeed a cut, and the case to be lamented. This grief
is crowned with consolation; your old smock brings
forth a new petticoat, and indeed the tears live in an
onion that should water this sorrow.

ANTONY
The business she hath broached in the state
Cannot endure my absence.

ENOBARBUS  And the business you have broached here
cannot be without you, especially that of Cleopatra's,
which wholly depends on your abode.

ANTONY
No more light answers. Let our officers
Have notice what we purpose. I shall break
The cause of our expedience to the Queen
And get her leave to part. For not alone
The death of Fulvia, with more urgent touches,
Do strongly speak to us, but the letters too
Of many our contriving friends in Rome
Petition us at home. Sextus Pompeius
Hath given the dare to Caesar and commands
The empire of the sea. Our slippery people,
Whose love is never linked to the deserver
Till his deserts are past, begin to throw
Pompey the Great and all his dignities
Upon his son, who--high in name and power,
Higher than both in blood and life--stands up
For the main soldier; whose quality, going on,
The sides o' th' world may danger. Much is
breeding
Which, like the courser's hair, hath yet but life
And not a serpent's poison. Say our pleasure,
To such whose place is under us, requires
Our quick remove from hence.

ENOBARBUS  I shall do 't.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Alexas, and Iras.]


CLEOPATRA
Where is he?

CHARMIAN  I did not see him since.

CLEOPATRA, [to Alexas]
See where he is, who's with him, what he does.
I did not send you. If you find him sad,
Say I am dancing; if in mirth, report
That I am sudden sick. Quick, and return.
[Alexas exits.]

CHARMIAN
Madam, methinks, if you did love him dearly,
You do not hold the method to enforce
The like from him.

CLEOPATRA  What should I do I do not?

CHARMIAN
In each thing give him way; cross him in nothing.

CLEOPATRA
Thou teachest like a fool: the way to lose him.

CHARMIAN
Tempt him not so too far. I wish, forbear.
In time we hate that which we often fear.

[Enter Antony.]

But here comes Antony.

CLEOPATRA  I am sick and sullen.

ANTONY
I am sorry to give breathing to my purpose--

CLEOPATRA
Help me away, dear Charmian! I shall fall.
It cannot be thus long; the sides of nature
Will not sustain it.

ANTONY  Now, my dearest queen--

CLEOPATRA
Pray you stand farther from me.

ANTONY  What's the matter?

CLEOPATRA
I know by that same eye there's some good news.
What, says the married woman you may go?
Would she had never given you leave to come.
Let her not say 'tis I that keep you here.
I have no power upon you. Hers you are.

ANTONY
The gods best know--

CLEOPATRA  O, never was there queen
So mightily betrayed! Yet at the first
I saw the treasons planted.

ANTONY  Cleopatra--

CLEOPATRA
Why should I think you can be mine, and true--
Though you in swearing shake the throned gods--
Who have been false to Fulvia? Riotous madness,
To be entangled with those mouth-made vows
Which break themselves in swearing!

ANTONY  Most sweet
queen--

CLEOPATRA
Nay, pray you seek no color for your going,
But bid farewell and go. When you sued staying,
Then was the time for words. No going then!
Eternity was in our lips and eyes,
Bliss in our brows' bent; none our parts so poor
But was a race of heaven. They are so still,
Or thou, the greatest soldier of the world,
Art turned the greatest liar.

ANTONY  How now, lady?

CLEOPATRA
I would I had thy inches. Thou shouldst know
There were a heart in Egypt.

ANTONY  Hear me, queen:
The strong necessity of time commands
Our services awhile, but my full heart
Remains in use with you. Our Italy
Shines o'er with civil swords; Sextus Pompeius
Makes his approaches to the port of Rome;
Equality of two domestic powers
Breed scrupulous faction; the hated grown to
strength
Are newly grown to love; the condemned Pompey,
Rich in his father's honor, creeps apace
Into the hearts of such as have not thrived
Upon the present state, whose numbers threaten;
And quietness, grown sick of rest, would purge
By any desperate change. My more particular,
And that which most with you should safe my going,
Is Fulvia's death.

CLEOPATRA
Though age from folly could not give me freedom,
It does from childishness. Can Fulvia die?

ANTONY  She's dead, my queen.	[He shows her papers.]
Look here, and at thy sovereign leisure read
The garboils she awaked; at the last, best,
See when and where she died.

CLEOPATRA  O, most false love!
Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill
With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see,
In Fulvia's death, how mine received shall be.

ANTONY
Quarrel no more, but be prepared to know
The purposes I bear, which are or cease
As you shall give th' advice. By the fire
That quickens Nilus' slime, I go from hence
Thy soldier, servant, making peace or war
As thou affects.

CLEOPATRA  Cut my lace, Charmian, come!
But let it be; I am quickly ill and well;
So Antony loves.

ANTONY  My precious queen, forbear,
And give true evidence to his love, which stands
An honorable trial.

CLEOPATRA  So Fulvia told me.
I prithee turn aside and weep for her,
Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears
Belong to Egypt. Good now, play one scene
Of excellent dissembling, and let it look
Like perfect honor.

ANTONY  You'll heat my blood. No more!

CLEOPATRA
You can do better yet, but this is meetly.

ANTONY
Now by my sword--

CLEOPATRA  And target. Still he mends.
But this is not the best. Look, prithee, Charmian,
How this Herculean Roman does become
The carriage of his chafe.

ANTONY  I'll leave you, lady.

CLEOPATRA  Courteous lord, one word.
Sir, you and I must part, but that's not it;
Sir, you and I have loved, but there's not it;
That you know well. Something it is I would--
O, my oblivion is a very Antony,
And I am all forgotten.

ANTONY  But that your Royalty
Holds idleness your subject, I should take you
For idleness itself.

CLEOPATRA  'Tis sweating labor
To bear such idleness so near the heart
As Cleopatra this. But, sir, forgive me,
Since my becomings kill me when they do not
Eye well to you. Your honor calls you hence;
Therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly,
And all the gods go with you. Upon your sword
Sit laurel victory, and smooth success
Be strewed before your feet.

ANTONY  Let us go. Come.
Our separation so abides and flies
That thou, residing here, goes yet with me,
And I, hence fleeting, here remain with thee.
Away!
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Octavius Caesar, reading a letter,
Lepidus, and their Train.]


CAESAR
You may see, Lepidus, and henceforth know,
It is not Caesar's natural vice to hate
Our great competitor. From Alexandria
This is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes
The lamps of night in revel, is not more manlike
Than Cleopatra, nor the queen of Ptolemy
More womanly than he; hardly gave audience, or
Vouchsafed to think he had partners. You shall
find there
A man who is th' abstract of all faults
That all men follow.

LEPIDUS  I must not think there are
Evils enough to darken all his goodness.
His faults in him seem as the spots of heaven,
More fiery by night's blackness, hereditary
Rather than purchased, what he cannot change
Than what he chooses.

CAESAR
You are too indulgent. Let's grant it is not
Amiss to tumble on the bed of Ptolemy,
To give a kingdom for a mirth, to sit
And keep the turn of tippling with a slave,
To reel the streets at noon and stand the buffet
With knaves that smells of sweat. Say this becomes
him--
As his composure must be rare indeed
Whom these things cannot blemish--yet must
Antony
No way excuse his foils when we do bear
So great weight in his lightness. If he filled
His vacancy with his voluptuousness,
Full surfeits and the dryness of his bones
Call on him for 't. But to confound such time
That drums him from his sport and speaks as loud
As his own state and ours, 'tis to be chid
As we rate boys who, being mature in knowledge,
Pawn their experience to their present pleasure
And so rebel to judgment.

[Enter a Messenger.]


LEPIDUS  Here's more news.

MESSENGER
Thy biddings have been done, and every hour,
Most noble Caesar, shalt thou have report
How 'tis abroad. Pompey is strong at sea,
And it appears he is beloved of those
That only have feared Caesar. To the ports
The discontents repair, and men's reports
Give him much wronged.

CAESAR  I should have known no less.
It hath been taught us from the primal state
That he which is was wished until he were,
And the ebbed man, ne'er loved till ne'er worth love,
Comes feared by being lacked. This common body,
Like to a vagabond flag upon the stream,
Goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide
To rot itself with motion.

[Enter a Second Messenger.]


SECOND MESSENGER  Caesar, I bring thee word
Menecrates and Menas, famous pirates,
Makes the sea serve them, which they ear and
wound
With keels of every kind. Many hot inroads
They make in Italy--the borders maritime
Lack blood to think on 't--and flush youth revolt.
No vessel can peep forth but 'tis as soon
Taken as seen, for Pompey's name strikes more
Than could his war resisted.

CAESAR  Antony,
Leave thy lascivious wassails. When thou once
Was beaten from Modena, where thou slew'st
Hirsius and Pansa, consuls, at thy heel
Did famine follow, whom thou fought'st against,
Though daintily brought up, with patience more
Than savages could suffer. Thou didst drink
The stale of horses and the gilded puddle
Which beasts would cough at. Thy palate then did
deign
The roughest berry on the rudest hedge.
Yea, like the stag when snow the pasture sheets,
The barks of trees thou browsed. On the Alps
It is reported thou didst eat strange flesh
Which some did die to look on. And all this--
It wounds thine honor that I speak it now--
Was borne so like a soldier that thy cheek
So much as lanked not.

LEPIDUS  'Tis pity of him.

CAESAR  Let his shames quickly
Drive him to Rome. 'Tis time we twain
Did show ourselves i' th' field, and to that end
Assemble we immediate council. Pompey
Thrives in our idleness.

LEPIDUS  Tomorrow, Caesar,
I shall be furnished to inform you rightly
Both what by sea and land I can be able
To front this present time.

CAESAR  Till which encounter,
It is my business too. Farewell.

LEPIDUS
Farewell, my lord. What you shall know meantime
Of stirs abroad, I shall beseech you, sir,
To let me be partaker.

CAESAR
Doubt not, sir. I knew it for my bond.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras, and Mardian.]


CLEOPATRA  Charmian!

CHARMIAN  Madam?

CLEOPATRA  Ha, ha! Give me to drink mandragora.

CHARMIAN  Why, madam?

CLEOPATRA
That I might sleep out this great gap of time
My Antony is away.

CHARMIAN  You think of him too much.

CLEOPATRA
O, 'tis treason!

CHARMIAN  Madam, I trust not so.

CLEOPATRA
Thou, eunuch Mardian!

MARDIAN  What's your Highness' pleasure?

CLEOPATRA
Not now to hear thee sing. I take no pleasure
In aught an eunuch has. 'Tis well for thee
That, being unseminared, thy freer thoughts
May not fly forth of Egypt. Hast thou affections?

MARDIAN  Yes, gracious madam.

CLEOPATRA  Indeed?

MARDIAN
Not in deed, madam, for I can do nothing
But what indeed is honest to be done.
Yet have I fierce affections, and think
What Venus did with Mars.

CLEOPATRA  O, Charmian,
Where think'st thou he is now? Stands he, or sits he?
Or does he walk? Or is he on his horse?
O happy horse, to bear the weight of Antony!
Do bravely, horse, for wot'st thou whom thou
mov'st?
The demi-Atlas of this Earth, the arm
And burgonet of men. He's speaking now,
Or murmuring "Where's my serpent of old Nile?"
For so he calls me. Now I feed myself
With most delicious poison. Think on me
That am with Phoebus' amorous pinches black,
And wrinkled deep in time? Broad-fronted Caesar,
When thou wast here above the ground, I was
A morsel for a monarch. And great Pompey
Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow;
There would he anchor his aspect, and die
With looking on his life.

[Enter Alexas from Antony.]


ALEXAS  Sovereign of Egypt, hail!

CLEOPATRA
How much unlike art thou Mark Antony!
Yet coming from him, that great med'cine hath
With his tinct gilded thee.
How goes it with my brave Mark Antony?

ALEXAS  Last thing he did, dear queen,
He kissed--the last of many doubled kisses--
This orient pearl. His speech sticks in my heart.

CLEOPATRA
Mine ear must pluck it thence.

ALEXAS  "Good friend," quoth
he,
"Say the firm Roman to great Egypt sends
This treasure of an oyster; at whose foot,
To mend the petty present, I will piece
Her opulent throne with kingdoms. All the East,
Say thou, shall call her mistress." So he nodded
And soberly did mount an arm-gaunt steed,
Who neighed so high that what I would have spoke
Was beastly dumbed by him.

CLEOPATRA  What, was he sad, or merry?

ALEXAS
Like to the time o' th' year between th' extremes
Of hot and cold, he was nor sad nor merry.

CLEOPATRA
O, well-divided disposition!--Note him,
Note him, good Charmian, 'tis the man! But note
him:
He was not sad, for he would shine on those
That make their looks by his; he was not merry,
Which seemed to tell them his remembrance lay
In Egypt with his joy; but between both.
O, heavenly mingle!--Be'st thou sad or merry,
The violence of either thee becomes,
So does it no man's else.--Met'st thou my posts?

ALEXAS
Ay, madam, twenty several messengers.
Why do you send so thick?

CLEOPATRA  Who's born that day
When I forget to send to Antony
Shall die a beggar.--Ink and paper, Charmian.--
Welcome, my good Alexas.--Did I, Charmian,
Ever love Caesar so?

CHARMIAN  O, that brave Caesar!

CLEOPATRA
Be choked with such another emphasis!
Say "the brave Antony."

CHARMIAN  The valiant Caesar!

CLEOPATRA
By Isis, I will give thee bloody teeth
If thou with Caesar paragon again
My man of men.

CHARMIAN  By your most gracious pardon,
I sing but after you.

CLEOPATRA  My salad days,
When I was green in judgment, cold in blood,
To say as I said then. But come, away,
Get me ink and paper.
He shall have every day a several greeting,
Or I'll unpeople Egypt.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Pompey, Menecrates, and Menas,
in warlike manner.]


POMPEY
If the great gods be just, they shall assist
The deeds of justest men.

MENAS  Know, worthy Pompey,
That what they do delay they not deny.

POMPEY
Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays
The thing we sue for.

MENAS  We, ignorant of ourselves,
Beg often our own harms, which the wise powers
Deny us for our good; so find we profit
By losing of our prayers.

POMPEY  I shall do well.
The people love me, and the sea is mine;
My powers are crescent, and my auguring hope
Says it will come to th' full. Mark Antony
In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make
No wars without doors. Caesar gets money where
He loses hearts. Lepidus flatters both,
Of both is flattered; but he neither loves,
Nor either cares for him.

MENAS  Caesar and Lepidus
Are in the field. A mighty strength they carry.

POMPEY
Where have you this? 'Tis false.

MENAS  From Silvius, sir.

POMPEY
He dreams. I know they are in Rome together,
Looking for Antony. But all the charms of love,
Salt Cleopatra, soften thy wanned lip!
Let witchcraft join with beauty, lust with both;
Tie up the libertine in a field of feasts;
Keep his brain fuming. Epicurean cooks
Sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite,
That sleep and feeding may prorogue his honor
Even till a Lethe'd dullness--

[Enter Varrius.]

How now, Varrius?

VARRIUS
This is most certain that I shall deliver:
Mark Antony is every hour in Rome
Expected. Since he went from Egypt 'tis
A space for farther travel.

POMPEY  I could have given less matter
A better ear.--Menas, I did not think
This amorous surfeiter would have donned his helm
For such a petty war. His soldiership
Is twice the other twain. But let us rear
The higher our opinion, that our stirring
Can from the lap of Egypt's widow pluck
The ne'er lust-wearied Antony.

MENAS  I cannot hope
Caesar and Antony shall well greet together.
His wife that's dead did trespasses to Caesar;
His brother warred upon him, although I think
Not moved by Antony.

POMPEY  I know not, Menas,
How lesser enmities may give way to greater.
Were 't not that we stand up against them all,
'Twere pregnant they should square between
themselves,
For they have entertained cause enough
To draw their swords. But how the fear of us
May cement their divisions and bind up
The petty difference, we yet not know.
Be 't as our gods will have 't. It only stands
Our lives upon to use our strongest hands.
Come, Menas.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Enobarbus and Lepidus.]


LEPIDUS
Good Enobarbus, 'tis a worthy deed,
And shall become you well, to entreat your captain
To soft and gentle speech.

ENOBARBUS  I shall entreat him
To answer like himself. If Caesar move him,
Let Antony look over Caesar's head
And speak as loud as Mars. By Jupiter,
Were I the wearer of Antonio's beard,
I would not shave 't today.

LEPIDUS
'Tis not a time for private stomaching.

ENOBARBUS  Every time serves for the matter that is
then born in 't.

LEPIDUS
But small to greater matters must give way.

ENOBARBUS  Not if the small come first.

LEPIDUS
Your speech is passion; but pray you stir
No embers up. Here comes the noble Antony.

[Enter, at one door, Antony and Ventidius.]


ENOBARBUS  And yonder Caesar.

[Enter, at another door, Caesar,
Maecenas, and Agrippa.]


ANTONY, [to Ventidius]
If we compose well here, to Parthia.
Hark, Ventidius.	[They talk aside.]

CAESAR, [to Maecenas]
I do not know, Maecenas. Ask Agrippa.

LEPIDUS, [to Caesar and Antony]  Noble friends,
That which combined us was most great, and let not
A leaner action rend us. What's amiss,
May it be gently heard. When we debate
Our trivial difference loud, we do commit
Murder in healing wounds. Then, noble partners,
The rather for I earnestly beseech,
Touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms,
Nor curstness grow to th' matter.

ANTONY  'Tis spoken well.
Were we before our armies, and to fight,
I should do thus.	[Flourish.]

CAESAR  Welcome to Rome.

ANTONY  Thank you.

CAESAR  Sit.

ANTONY  Sit, sir.

CAESAR  Nay, then.	[They sit.]

ANTONY
I learn you take things ill which are not so,
Or, being, concern you not.

CAESAR  I must be laughed at
If or for nothing or a little, I
Should say myself offended, and with you
Chiefly i' th' world; more laughed at, that I should
Once name you derogately when to sound your
name
It not concerned me.

ANTONY
My being in Egypt, Caesar, what was 't to you?

CAESAR
No more than my residing here at Rome
Might be to you in Egypt. Yet if you there
Did practice on my state, your being in Egypt
Might be my question.

ANTONY  How intend you, practiced?

CAESAR
You may be pleased to catch at mine intent
By what did here befall me. Your wife and brother
Made wars upon me, and their contestation
Was theme for you; you were the word of war.

ANTONY
You do mistake your business. My brother never
Did urge me in his act. I did inquire it,
And have my learning from some true reports
That drew their swords with you. Did he not rather
Discredit my authority with yours,
And make the wars alike against my stomach,
Having alike your cause? Of this my letters
Before did satisfy you. If you'll patch a quarrel,
As matter whole you have to make it with,
It must not be with this.

CAESAR  You praise yourself
By laying defects of judgment to me; but
You patched up your excuses.

ANTONY  Not so, not so.
I know you could not lack--I am certain on 't--
Very necessity of this thought, that I,
Your partner in the cause 'gainst which he fought,
Could not with graceful eyes attend those wars
Which fronted mine own peace. As for my wife,
I would you had her spirit in such another.
The third o' th' world is yours, which with a snaffle
You may pace easy, but not such a wife.

ENOBARBUS  Would we had all such wives, that the men
might go to wars with the women!

ANTONY
So much uncurbable, her garboils, Caesar,
Made out of her impatience--which not wanted
Shrewdness of policy too--I grieving grant
Did you too much disquiet. For that you must
But say I could not help it.

CAESAR  I wrote to you
When rioting in Alexandria; you
Did pocket up my letters, and with taunts
Did gibe my missive out of audience.

ANTONY  Sir,
He fell upon me ere admitted, then;
Three kings I had newly feasted, and did want
Of what I was i' th' morning. But next day
I told him of myself, which was as much
As to have asked him pardon. Let this fellow
Be nothing of our strife; if we contend,
Out of our question wipe him.

CAESAR  You have broken
The article of your oath, which you shall never
Have tongue to charge me with.

LEPIDUS  Soft, Caesar!

ANTONY  No, Lepidus, let him speak.
The honor is sacred which he talks on now,
Supposing that I lacked it.--But on, Caesar:
The article of my oath?

CAESAR
To lend me arms and aid when I required them,
The which you both denied.

ANTONY  Neglected, rather;
And then when poisoned hours had bound me up
From mine own knowledge. As nearly as I may
I'll play the penitent to you. But mine honesty
Shall not make poor my greatness, nor my power
Work without it. Truth is that Fulvia,
To have me out of Egypt, made wars here,
For which myself, the ignorant motive, do
So far ask pardon as befits mine honor
To stoop in such a case.

LEPIDUS  'Tis noble spoken.

MAECENAS
If it might please you to enforce no further
The griefs between you, to forget them quite
Were to remember that the present need
Speaks to atone you.

LEPIDUS  Worthily spoken, Maecenas.

ENOBARBUS  Or, if you borrow one another's love for
the instant, you may, when you hear no more words
of Pompey, return it again. You shall have time to
wrangle in when you have nothing else to do.

ANTONY
Thou art a soldier only. Speak no more.

ENOBARBUS  That truth should be silent I had almost
forgot.

ANTONY
You wrong this presence; therefore speak no more.

ENOBARBUS  Go to, then. Your considerate stone.

CAESAR
I do not much dislike the matter, but
The manner of his speech; for 't cannot be
We shall remain in friendship, our conditions
So diff'ring in their acts. Yet if I knew
What hoop should hold us staunch, from edge to
edge
O' th' world I would pursue it.

AGRIPPA  Give me leave, Caesar.

CAESAR  Speak, Agrippa.

AGRIPPA
Thou hast a sister by the mother's side,
Admired Octavia. Great Mark Antony
Is now a widower.

CAESAR  Say not so, Agrippa.
If Cleopatra heard you, your reproof
Were well deserved of rashness.

ANTONY
I am not married, Caesar. Let me hear
Agrippa further speak.

AGRIPPA
To hold you in perpetual amity,
To make you brothers, and to knit your hearts
With an unslipping knot, take Antony
Octavia to his wife, whose beauty claims
No worse a husband than the best of men;
Whose virtue and whose general graces speak
That which none else can utter. By this marriage
All little jealousies, which now seem great,
And all great fears, which now import their dangers,
Would then be nothing. Truths would be tales,
Where now half-tales be truths. Her love to both
Would each to other and all loves to both
Draw after her. Pardon what I have spoke,
For 'tis a studied, not a present thought,
By duty ruminated.

ANTONY  Will Caesar speak?

CAESAR
Not till he hears how Antony is touched
With what is spoke already.

ANTONY  What power is in Agrippa,
If I would say "Agrippa, be it so,"
To make this good?

CAESAR  The power of Caesar, and
His power unto Octavia.

ANTONY  May I never
To this good purpose, that so fairly shows,
Dream of impediment. Let me have thy hand.
Further this act of grace; and from this hour
The heart of brothers govern in our loves
And sway our great designs.

CAESAR  There's my hand.
[They clasp hands.]
A sister I bequeath you whom no brother
Did ever love so dearly. Let her live
To join our kingdoms and our hearts; and never
Fly off our loves again.

LEPIDUS  Happily, amen!

ANTONY
I did not think to draw my sword 'gainst Pompey,
For he hath laid strange courtesies and great
Of late upon me. I must thank him only,
Lest my remembrance suffer ill report;
At heel of that, defy him.

LEPIDUS  Time calls upon 's.
Of us must Pompey presently be sought,
Or else he seeks out us.

ANTONY  Where lies he?

CAESAR  About the Mount Misena.

ANTONY  What is his strength by land?

CAESAR  Great and increasing;
But by sea he is an absolute master.

ANTONY  So is the fame.
Would we had spoke together. Haste we for it.
Yet, ere we put ourselves in arms, dispatch we
The business we have talked of.

CAESAR  With most gladness,
And do invite you to my sister's view,
Whither straight I'll lead you.

ANTONY
Let us, Lepidus, not lack your company.

LEPIDUS
Noble Antony, not sickness should detain me.
[Flourish. All but Enobarbus, Agrippa, and
Maecenas exit.]

MAECENAS, [to Enobarbus]  Welcome from Egypt, sir.

ENOBARBUS  Half the heart of Caesar, worthy
Maecenas!--My honorable friend Agrippa!

AGRIPPA  Good Enobarbus!

MAECENAS  We have cause to be glad that matters are so
well digested. You stayed well by 't in Egypt.

ENOBARBUS  Ay, sir, we did sleep day out of countenance
and made the night light with drinking.

MAECENAS  Eight wild boars roasted whole at a breakfast,
and but twelve persons there. Is this true?

ENOBARBUS  This was but as a fly by an eagle. We had
much more monstrous matter of feast, which worthily
deserved noting.

MAECENAS  She's a most triumphant lady, if report be
square to her.

ENOBARBUS  When she first met Mark Antony, she
pursed up his heart upon the river of Cydnus.

AGRIPPA  There she appeared indeed, or my reporter
devised well for her.

ENOBARBUS  I will tell you.
The barge she sat in like a burnished throne
Burned on the water. The poop was beaten gold,
Purple the sails, and so perfumed that
The winds were lovesick with them. The oars were
silver,
Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
The water which they beat to follow faster,
As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
It beggared all description: she did lie
In her pavilion--cloth-of-gold, of tissue--
O'erpicturing that Venus where we see
The fancy outwork nature. On each side her
Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids,
With divers-colored fans, whose wind did seem
To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool,
And what they undid did.

AGRIPPA  O, rare for Antony!

ENOBARBUS
Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,
So many mermaids, tended her i' th' eyes,
And made their bends adornings. At the helm
A seeming mermaid steers. The silken tackle
Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands
That yarely frame the office. From the barge
A strange invisible perfume hits the sense
Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast
Her people out upon her; and Antony,
Enthroned i' th' market-place, did sit alone,
Whistling to th' air, which but for vacancy
Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too
And made a gap in nature.

AGRIPPA  Rare Egyptian!

ENOBARBUS
Upon her landing, Antony sent to her,
Invited her to supper. She replied
It should be better he became her guest,
Which she entreated. Our courteous Antony,
Whom ne'er the word of "No" woman heard speak,
Being barbered ten times o'er, goes to the feast,
And for his ordinary pays his heart
For what his eyes eat only.

AGRIPPA  Royal wench!
She made great Caesar lay his sword to bed;
He ploughed her, and she cropped.

ENOBARBUS  I saw her once
Hop forty paces through the public street,
And having lost her breath, she spoke and panted,
That she did make defect perfection,
And breathless pour breath forth.

MAECENAS
Now Antony must leave her utterly.

ENOBARBUS  Never. He will not.
Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
Her infinite variety. Other women cloy
The appetites they feed, but she makes hungry
Where most she satisfies. For vilest things
Become themselves in her, that the holy priests
Bless her when she is riggish.

MAECENAS
If beauty, wisdom, modesty can settle
The heart of Antony, Octavia is
A blessed lottery to him.

AGRIPPA  Let us go.
Good Enobarbus, make yourself my guest
Whilst you abide here.

ENOBARBUS  Humbly, sir, I thank you.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Antony, Caesar; Octavia between them.]


ANTONY
The world and my great office will sometimes
Divide me from your bosom.

OCTAVIA  All which time
Before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers
To them for you.

ANTONY, [to Caesar]  Goodnight, sir.--My Octavia,
Read not my blemishes in the world's report.
I have not kept my square, but that to come
Shall all be done by th' rule. Good night, dear
lady.--
Good night, sir.

CAESAR  Goodnight.	[Caesar and Octavia exit.]

[Enter Soothsayer.]


ANTONY
Now, sirrah, you do wish yourself in Egypt?

SOOTHSAYER  Would I had never come from thence,
nor you thither.

ANTONY  If you can, your reason?

SOOTHSAYER  I see it in my motion, have it not in my
tongue. But yet hie you to Egypt again.

ANTONY
Say to me, whose fortunes shall rise higher,
Caesar's or mine?

SOOTHSAYER  Caesar's.
Therefore, O Antony, stay not by his side.
Thy daemon--that thy spirit which keeps thee--is
Noble, courageous, high, unmatchable,
Where Caesar's is not. But near him, thy angel
Becomes afeard, as being o'erpowered. Therefore
Make space enough between you.

ANTONY  Speak this no more.

SOOTHSAYER
To none but thee; no more but when to thee.
If thou dost play with him at any game,
Thou art sure to lose; and of that natural luck
He beats thee 'gainst the odds. Thy luster thickens
When he shines by. I say again, thy spirit
Is all afraid to govern thee near him;
But he away, 'tis noble.

ANTONY  Get thee gone.
Say to Ventidius I would speak with him.
[Soothsayer exits.]
He shall to Parthia. Be it art or hap,
He hath spoken true. The very dice obey him,
And in our sports my better cunning faints
Under his chance. If we draw lots, he speeds;
His cocks do win the battle still of mine
When it is all to naught, and his quails ever
Beat mine, inhooped, at odds. I will to Egypt.
And though I make this marriage for my peace,
I' th' East my pleasure lies.

[Enter Ventidius.]

O, come, Ventidius.
You must to Parthia; your commission's ready.
Follow me and receive 't.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Lepidus, Maecenas, and Agrippa.]


LEPIDUS
Trouble yourselves no further. Pray you hasten
Your generals after.

AGRIPPA  Sir, Mark Antony
Will e'en but kiss Octavia, and we'll follow.

LEPIDUS
Till I shall see you in your soldiers' dress,
Which will become you both, farewell.

MAECENAS  We shall,
As I conceive the journey, be at the Mount
Before you, Lepidus.

LEPIDUS  Your way is shorter;
My purposes do draw me much about.
You'll win two days upon me.

BOTH  Sir, good success.

LEPIDUS  Farewell.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras, and Alexas.]


CLEOPATRA
Give me some music--music, moody food
Of us that trade in love.

ALL  The music, ho!

[Enter Mardian the eunuch.]


CLEOPATRA
Let it alone. Let's to billiards. Come, Charmian.

CHARMIAN
My arm is sore. Best play with Mardian.

CLEOPATRA
As well a woman with an eunuch played
As with a woman.--Come, you'll play with me, sir?

MARDIAN  As well as I can, madam.

CLEOPATRA
And when good will is showed, though 't come too
short,
The actor may plead pardon. I'll none now.
Give me mine angle; we'll to th' river. There,
My music playing far off, I will betray
Tawny-finned fishes. My bended hook shall pierce
Their slimy jaws, and as I draw them up
I'll think them every one an Antony
And say "Aha! You're caught."

CHARMIAN  'Twas merry when
You wagered on your angling; when your diver
Did hang a salt fish on his hook, which he
With fervency drew up.

CLEOPATRA  That time?--O, times!--
I laughed him out of patience; and that night
I laughed him into patience; and next morn,
Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed,
Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst
I wore his sword Philippan.

[Enter a Messenger.]

O, from Italy!
Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,
That long time have been barren.

MESSENGER  Madam, madam--

CLEOPATRA
Antonio's dead! If thou say so, villain,
Thou kill'st thy mistress. But well and free,
If thou so yield him, there is gold, and here
My bluest veins to kiss, a hand that kings
Have lipped and trembled kissing.

MESSENGER  First, madam, he is well.

CLEOPATRA
Why, there's more gold. But sirrah, mark, we use
To say the dead are well. Bring it to that,
The gold I give thee will I melt and pour
Down thy ill-uttering throat.

MESSENGER  Good madam, hear me.

CLEOPATRA  Well, go to, I will.
But there's no goodness in thy face--if Antony
Be free and healthful, so tart a favor
To trumpet such good tidings! If not well,
Thou shouldst come like a Fury crowned with snakes,
Not like a formal man.

MESSENGER  Will 't please you hear me?

CLEOPATRA
I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st.
Yet if thou say Antony lives, is well,
Or friends with Caesar or not captive to him,
I'll set thee in a shower of gold and hail
Rich pearls upon thee.

MESSENGER  Madam, he's well.

CLEOPATRA  Well said.

MESSENGER
And friends with Caesar.

CLEOPATRA  Th' art an honest man.

MESSENGER
Caesar and he are greater friends than ever.

CLEOPATRA
Make thee a fortune from me.

MESSENGER  But yet, madam--

CLEOPATRA
I do not like "But yet." It does allay
The good precedence. Fie upon "But yet."
"But yet" is as a jailer to bring forth
Some monstrous malefactor. Prithee, friend,
Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear,
The good and bad together: he's friends with Caesar,
In state of health, thou say'st, and, thou say'st, free.

MESSENGER
Free, madam, no. I made no such report.
He's bound unto Octavia.

CLEOPATRA  For what good turn?

MESSENGER
For the best turn i' th' bed.

CLEOPATRA  I am pale, Charmian.

MESSENGER
Madam, he's married to Octavia.

CLEOPATRA
The most infectious pestilence upon thee!
[Strikes him down.]

MESSENGER  Good madam, patience!

CLEOPATRA  What say you?	[Strikes him.]
Hence, horrible villain, or I'll spurn thine eyes
Like balls before me! I'll unhair thy head!
[She hales him up and down.]
Thou shalt be whipped with wire and stewed in
brine,
Smarting in ling'ring pickle.

MESSENGER  Gracious madam,
I that do bring the news made not the match.

CLEOPATRA
Say 'tis not so, a province I will give thee
And make thy fortunes proud. The blow thou hadst
Shall make thy peace for moving me to rage,
And I will boot thee with what gift beside
Thy modesty can beg.

MESSENGER  He's married, madam.

CLEOPATRA
Rogue, thou hast lived too long.	[Draw a knife.]

MESSENGER  Nay then, I'll run.
What mean you, madam? I have made no fault.
[He exits.]

CHARMIAN
Good madam, keep yourself within yourself.
The man is innocent.

CLEOPATRA
Some innocents 'scape not the thunderbolt.
Melt Egypt into Nile, and kindly creatures
Turn all to serpents! Call the slave again.
Though I am mad, I will not bite him. Call!

CHARMIAN
He is afeard to come.

CLEOPATRA  I will not hurt him.
These hands do lack nobility that they strike
A meaner than myself, since I myself
Have given myself the cause.

[Enter the Messenger again.]

Come hither, sir.
Though it be honest, it is never good
To bring bad news. Give to a gracious message
An host of tongues, but let ill tidings tell
Themselves when they be felt.

MESSENGER  I have done my duty.

CLEOPATRA  Is he married?
I cannot hate thee worser than I do
If thou again say "yes."

MESSENGER  He's married, madam.

CLEOPATRA
The gods confound thee! Dost thou hold there still?

MESSENGER
Should I lie, madam?

CLEOPATRA  O, I would thou didst,
So half my Egypt were submerged and made
A cistern for scaled snakes! Go, get thee hence.
Hadst thou Narcissus in thy face, to me
Thou wouldst appear most ugly. He is married?

MESSENGER
I crave your Highness' pardon.

CLEOPATRA  He is married?

MESSENGER
Take no offense that I would not offend you.
To punish me for what you make me do
Seems much unequal. He's married to Octavia.

CLEOPATRA
O, that his fault should make a knave of thee
That art not what th' art sure of! Get thee hence.
The merchandise which thou hast brought from
Rome
Are all too dear for me. Lie they upon thy hand,
And be undone by 'em!	[Messenger exits.]

CHARMIAN  Good your Highness,
patience.

CLEOPATRA
In praising Antony, I have dispraised Caesar.

CHARMIAN  Many times, madam.

CLEOPATRA
I am paid for 't now. Lead me from hence;
I faint. O, Iras, Charmian! 'Tis no matter.--
Go to the fellow, good Alexas. Bid him
Report the feature of Octavia, her years,
Her inclination; let him not leave out
The color of her hair. Bring me word quickly.
[Alexas exits.]
Let him forever go--let him not, Charmian.
Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon,
The other way 's a Mars. [(To Mardian.)] Bid you
Alexas
Bring me word how tall she is.--Pity me,
Charmian,
But do not speak to me. Lead me to my chamber.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Flourish. Enter Pompey and Menas at one door,
with Drum and Trumpet; at another Caesar, Lepidus,
Antony, Enobarbus, Maecenas, and Agrippa,
with Soldiers marching.]


POMPEY
Your hostages I have, so have you mine,
And we shall talk before we fight.

CAESAR  Most meet
That first we come to words, and therefore have we
Our written purposes before us sent,
Which if thou hast considered, let us know
If 'twill tie up thy discontented sword
And carry back to Sicily much tall youth
That else must perish here.

POMPEY  To you all three,
The senators alone of this great world,
Chief factors for the gods: I do not know
Wherefore my father should revengers want,
Having a son and friends, since Julius Caesar,
Who at Philippi the good Brutus ghosted,
There saw you laboring for him. What was 't
That moved pale Cassius to conspire? And what
Made the all-honored, honest, Roman Brutus,
With the armed rest, courtiers of beauteous
freedom,
To drench the Capitol, but that they would
Have one man but a man? And that is it
Hath made me rig my navy, at whose burden
The angered ocean foams, with which I meant
To scourge th' ingratitude that despiteful Rome
Cast on my noble father.

CAESAR  Take your time.

ANTONY
Thou canst not fear us, Pompey, with thy sails.
We'll speak with thee at sea. At land thou know'st
How much we do o'ercount thee.

POMPEY  At land indeed
Thou dost o'ercount me of my father's house;
But since the cuckoo builds not for himself,
Remain in 't as thou mayst.

LEPIDUS  Be pleased to tell us--
For this is from the present--how you take
The offers we have sent you.

CAESAR  There's the point.

ANTONY
Which do not be entreated to, but weigh
What it is worth embraced.

CAESAR  And what may follow
To try a larger fortune.

POMPEY  You have made me offer
Of Sicily, Sardinia; and I must
Rid all the sea of pirates; then to send
Measures of wheat to Rome. This 'greed upon,
To part with unhacked edges and bear back
Our targes undinted.

ALL  That's our offer.

POMPEY  Know then
I came before you here a man prepared
To take this offer. But Mark Antony
Put me to some impatience.--Though I lose
The praise of it by telling, you must know
When Caesar and your brother were at blows,
Your mother came to Sicily and did find
Her welcome friendly.

ANTONY  I have heard it, Pompey,
And am well studied for a liberal thanks,
Which I do owe you.

POMPEY  Let me have your hand.
[They clasp hands.]
I did not think, sir, to have met you here.

ANTONY
The beds i' th' East are soft; and thanks to you,
That called me timelier than my purpose hither,
For I have gained by 't.

CAESAR, [to Pompey]  Since I saw you last,
There's a change upon you.

POMPEY  Well, I know not
What counts harsh Fortune casts upon my face,
But in my bosom shall she never come
To make my heart her vassal.

LEPIDUS  Well met here.

POMPEY
I hope so, Lepidus. Thus we are agreed.
I crave our composition may be written
And sealed between us.

CAESAR  That's the next to do.

POMPEY
We'll feast each other ere we part, and let's
Draw lots who shall begin.

ANTONY  That will I, Pompey.

POMPEY
No, Antony, take the lot. But, first or last,
Your fine Egyptian cookery shall have
The fame. I have heard that Julius Caesar
Grew fat with feasting there.

ANTONY  You have heard much.

POMPEY  I have fair meanings, sir.

ANTONY  And fair words to them.

POMPEY  Then so much have I heard.
And I have heard Apollodorus carried--

ENOBARBUS
No more of that. He did so.

POMPEY  What, I pray you?

ENOBARBUS
A certain queen to Caesar in a mattress.

POMPEY
I know thee now. How far'st thou, soldier?

ENOBARBUS  Well,
And well am like to do, for I perceive
Four feasts are toward.

POMPEY  Let me shake thy hand.
I never hated thee. I have seen thee fight
When I have envied thy behavior.

ENOBARBUS  Sir,
I never loved you much, but I ha' praised you
When you have well deserved ten times as much
As I have said you did.

POMPEY  Enjoy thy plainness;
It nothing ill becomes thee.--
Aboard my galley I invite you all.
Will you lead, lords?

ALL  Show 's the way, sir.

POMPEY  Come.
[They exit, except for Enobarbus and Menas.]

MENAS, [aside]  Thy father, Pompey, would ne'er have
made this treaty.--You and I have known, sir.

ENOBARBUS  At sea, I think.

MENAS  We have, sir.

ENOBARBUS  You have done well by water.

MENAS  And you by land.

ENOBARBUS  I will praise any man that will praise me,
though it cannot be denied what I have done by
land.

MENAS  Nor what I have done by water.

ENOBARBUS  Yes, something you can deny for your own
safety: you have been a great thief by sea.

MENAS  And you by land.

ENOBARBUS  There I deny my land service. But give me
your hand, Menas. [They clasp hands.] If our eyes
had authority, here they might take two thieves
kissing.

MENAS  All men's faces are true, whatsome'er their
hands are.

ENOBARBUS  But there is never a fair woman has a true
face.

MENAS  No slander. They steal hearts.

ENOBARBUS  We came hither to fight with you.

MENAS  For my part, I am sorry it is turned to a
drinking. Pompey doth this day laugh away his
fortune.

ENOBARBUS  If he do, sure he cannot weep 't back
again.

MENAS  You've said, sir. We looked not for Mark Antony
here. Pray you, is he married to Cleopatra?

ENOBARBUS  Caesar's sister is called Octavia.

MENAS  True, sir. She was the wife of Caius Marcellus.

ENOBARBUS  But she is now the wife of Marcus
Antonius.

MENAS  Pray you, sir?

ENOBARBUS  'Tis true.

MENAS  Then is Caesar and he forever knit together.

ENOBARBUS  If I were bound to divine of this unity, I
would not prophesy so.

MENAS  I think the policy of that purpose made more in
the marriage than the love of the parties.

ENOBARBUS  I think so, too. But you shall find the band
that seems to tie their friendship together will be
the very strangler of their amity. Octavia is of a holy,
cold, and still conversation.

MENAS  Who would not have his wife so?

ENOBARBUS  Not he that himself is not so, which is
Mark Antony. He will to his Egyptian dish again.
Then shall the sighs of Octavia blow the fire up in
Caesar, and, as I said before, that which is the
strength of their amity shall prove the immediate
author of their variance. Antony will use his affection
where it is. He married but his occasion here.

MENAS  And thus it may be. Come, sir, will you aboard?
I have a health for you.

ENOBARBUS  I shall take it, sir. We have used our throats
in Egypt.

MENAS  Come, let's away.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Music plays. Enter two or three Servants
with a banquet.]


FIRST SERVANT  Here they'll be, man. Some o' their
plants are ill-rooted already. The least wind i' th'
world will blow them down.

SECOND SERVANT  Lepidus is high-colored.

FIRST SERVANT  They have made him drink alms-drink.

SECOND SERVANT  As they pinch one another by the
disposition, he cries out "No more," reconciles
them to his entreaty and himself to th' drink.

FIRST SERVANT  But it raises the greater war between
him and his discretion.

SECOND SERVANT  Why, this it is to have a name in great
men's fellowship. I had as lief have a reed that will
do me no service as a partisan I could not heave.

FIRST SERVANT  To be called into a huge sphere, and not
to be seen to move in 't, are the holes where eyes
should be, which pitifully disaster the cheeks.

[A sennet sounded. Enter Caesar, Antony, Pompey,
Lepidus, Agrippa, Maecenas, Enobarbus, Menas, with
other Captains and a Boy.]


ANTONY
Thus do they, sir: they take the flow o' th' Nile
By certain scales i' th' Pyramid; they know
By th' height, the lowness, or the mean if dearth
Or foison follow. The higher Nilus swells,
The more it promises. As it ebbs, the seedsman
Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain,
And shortly comes to harvest.

LEPIDUS  You've strange serpents there?

ANTONY  Ay, Lepidus.

LEPIDUS  Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your
mud by the operation of your sun; so is your
crocodile.

ANTONY  They are so.

POMPEY
Sit, and some wine. A health to Lepidus!

LEPIDUS  I am not so well as I should be, but I'll ne'er
out.

ENOBARBUS, [aside]  Not till you have slept. I fear me
you'll be in till then.

LEPIDUS  Nay, certainly, I have heard the Ptolemies'
pyramises are very goodly things. Without contradiction
I have heard that.

MENAS, [aside to Pompey]
Pompey, a word.

POMPEY, [aside to Menas]  Say in mine ear what is 't.

MENAS [(whispers in 's ear)]
Forsake thy seat, I do beseech thee, captain,
And hear me speak a word.

POMPEY, [aside to Menas]
Forbear me till anon.--This wine for Lepidus!

LEPIDUS  What manner o' thing is your crocodile?

ANTONY  It is shaped, sir, like itself, and it is as broad as
it hath breadth. It is just so high as it is, and moves
with it own organs. It lives by that which nourisheth
it, and the elements once out of it, it
transmigrates.

LEPIDUS  What color is it of?

ANTONY  Of it own color too.

LEPIDUS  'Tis a strange serpent.

ANTONY  'Tis so, and the tears of it are wet.

CAESAR, [aside to Antony]  Will this description satisfy
him?

ANTONY  With the health that Pompey gives him, else he
is a very epicure.

POMPEY, [aside to Menas]
Go hang, sir, hang! Tell me of that? Away!
Do as I bid you.--Where's this cup I called for?

MENAS, [aside to Pompey]
If for the sake of merit thou wilt hear me,
Rise from thy stool.

POMPEY  I think th' art mad!
[He rises, and they walk aside.]
The matter?

MENAS
I have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes.

POMPEY
Thou hast served me with much faith. What's else
to say?--
Be jolly, lords.

ANTONY  These quicksands, Lepidus,
Keep off them, for you sink.

MENAS, [aside to Pompey]
Wilt thou be lord of all the world?

POMPEY  What sayst thou?

MENAS
Wilt thou be lord of the whole world? That's twice.

POMPEY  How should that be?

MENAS  But entertain it,
And though thou think me poor, I am the man
Will give thee all the world.

POMPEY  Hast thou drunk well?

MENAS
No, Pompey, I have kept me from the cup.
Thou art, if thou dar'st be, the earthly Jove.
Whate'er the ocean pales or sky inclips
Is thine, if thou wilt ha 't.

POMPEY  Show me which way.

MENAS
These three world-sharers, these competitors,
Are in thy vessel. Let me cut the cable,
And when we are put off, fall to their throats.
All there is thine.

POMPEY  Ah, this thou shouldst have done
And not have spoke on 't! In me 'tis villainy;
In thee 't had been good service. Thou must know
'Tis not my profit that does lead mine honor;
Mine honor, it. Repent that e'er thy tongue
Hath so betrayed thine act. Being done unknown,
I should have found it afterwards well done,
But must condemn it now. Desist and drink.

MENAS, [aside]  For this
I'll never follow thy palled fortunes more.
Who seeks and will not take when once 'tis offered
Shall never find it more.

POMPEY  This health to Lepidus!

ANTONY, [to Servant]
Bear him ashore.--I'll pledge it for him, Pompey.

ENOBARBUS
Here's to thee, Menas.

MENAS  Enobarbus, welcome.

POMPEY  Fill till the cup be hid.

ENOBARBUS, [pointing to the Servant carrying Lepidus]
There's a strong fellow, Menas.

MENAS  Why?

ENOBARBUS  He bears
The third part of the world, man. Seest not?

MENAS
The third part, then, is drunk. Would it were all,
That it might go on wheels.

ENOBARBUS  Drink thou. Increase the reels.

MENAS  Come.

POMPEY
This is not yet an Alexandrian feast.

ANTONY
It ripens towards it. Strike the vessels, ho!
Here's to Caesar.

CAESAR  I could well forbear 't.
It's monstrous labor when I wash my brain
And it grows fouler.

ANTONY  Be a child o' th' time.

CAESAR  Possess it, I'll make answer.
But I had rather fast from all, four days,
Than drink so much in one.

ENOBARBUS, [to Antony]  Ha, my brave emperor,
Shall we dance now the Egyptian bacchanals
And celebrate our drink?

POMPEY  Let's ha 't, good soldier.

ANTONY  Come, let's all take hands
Till that the conquering wine hath steeped our
sense
In soft and delicate Lethe.

ENOBARBUS  All take hands.
Make battery to our ears with the loud music,
The while I'll place you; then the boy shall sing.
The holding every man shall beat as loud
As his strong sides can volley.

[Music plays. Enobarbus places them hand in hand.]

The Song.

BOY	Come, thou monarch of the vine,
	Plumpy Bacchus, with pink eyne.
	In thy vats our cares be drowned.
	With thy grapes our hairs be crowned.

ALL	Cup us till the world go round,
	   Cup us till the world go round.

CAESAR
What would you more?--Pompey, goodnight.--
Good brother,
Let me request you off. Our graver business
Frowns at this levity.--Gentle lords, let's part.
You see we have burnt our cheeks. Strong Enobarb
Is weaker than the wine, and mine own tongue
Splits what it speaks. The wild disguise hath almost
Anticked us all. What needs more words?
Goodnight.
Good Antony, your hand.

POMPEY  I'll try you on the shore.

ANTONY  And shall, sir. Give 's your hand.

POMPEY
O, Antony, you have my father's house.
But what? We are friends! Come down into the boat.

ENOBARBUS
Take heed you fall not.
[All but Menas and Enobarbus exit.]
Menas, I'll not on shore.

MENAS
No, to my cabin. These drums, these trumpets,
flutes! What!
Let Neptune hear we bid a loud farewell
To these great fellows. Sound and be hanged. Sound
out!	[Sound a flourish, with drums.]

ENOBARBUS  Hoo, says 'a! There's my cap!
[He throws his cap in the air.]

MENAS  Hoo! Noble captain, come.
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Ventidius as it were in triumph, the dead body of
Pacorus borne before him; with Silius and Soldiers.]


VENTIDIUS
Now, darting Parthia, art thou struck, and now
Pleased Fortune does of Marcus Crassus' death
Make me revenger. Bear the King's son's body
Before our army. Thy Pacorus, Orodes,
Pays this for Marcus Crassus.

SILIUS  Noble Ventidius,
Whilst yet with Parthian blood thy sword is warm,
The fugitive Parthians follow. Spur through Media,
Mesopotamia, and the shelters whither
The routed fly. So thy grand captain, Antony,
Shall set thee on triumphant chariots and
Put garlands on thy head.

VENTIDIUS  O, Silius, Silius,
I have done enough. A lower place, note well,
May make too great an act. For learn this, Silius:
Better to leave undone than by our deed
Acquire too high a fame when him we serve 's away.
Caesar and Antony have ever won
More in their officer than person. Sossius,
One of my place in Syria, his lieutenant,
For quick accumulation of renown,
Which he achieved by th' minute, lost his favor.
Who does i' th' wars more than his captain can
Becomes his captain's captain; and ambition,
The soldier's virtue, rather makes choice of loss
Than gain which darkens him.
I could do more to do Antonius good,
But 'twould offend him. And in his offense
Should my performance perish.

SILIUS  Thou hast, Ventidius, that
Without the which a soldier and his sword
Grants scarce distinction. Thou wilt write to
Antony?

VENTIDIUS
I'll humbly signify what in his name,
That magical word of war, we have effected;
How, with his banners and his well-paid ranks,
The ne'er-yet-beaten horse of Parthia
We have jaded out o' th' field.

SILIUS  Where is he now?

VENTIDIUS
He purposeth to Athens, whither, with what haste
The weight we must convey with 's will permit,
We shall appear before him.--On there, pass along!
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Agrippa at one door, Enobarbus at another.]


AGRIPPA  What, are the brothers parted?

ENOBARBUS
They have dispatched with Pompey; he is gone.
The other three are sealing. Octavia weeps
To part from Rome. Caesar is sad, and Lepidus,
Since Pompey's feast, as Menas says, is troubled
With the greensickness.

AGRIPPA  'Tis a noble Lepidus.

ENOBARBUS
A very fine one. O, how he loves Caesar!

AGRIPPA
Nay, but how dearly he adores Mark Antony!

ENOBARBUS
Caesar? Why, he's the Jupiter of men.

AGRIPPA
What's Antony? The god of Jupiter.

ENOBARBUS
Spake you of Caesar? How, the nonpareil!

AGRIPPA
O Antony, O thou Arabian bird!

ENOBARBUS
Would you praise Caesar, say "Caesar." Go no
further.

AGRIPPA
Indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.

ENOBARBUS
But he loves Caesar best, yet he loves Antony.
Hoo, hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards, poets,
cannot
Think, speak, cast, write, sing, number--hoo!--
His love to Antony. But as for Caesar,
Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.

AGRIPPA  Both he loves.

ENOBARBUS
They are his shards and he their beetle.
[Trumpet within.]
So,
This is to horse. Adieu, noble Agrippa.

AGRIPPA
Good fortune, worthy soldier, and farewell.

[Enter Caesar, Antony, Lepidus, and Octavia.]


ANTONY  No further, sir.

CAESAR
You take from me a great part of myself.
Use me well in 't.--Sister, prove such a wife
As my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest bond
Shall pass on thy approof.--Most noble Antony,
Let not the piece of virtue which is set
Betwixt us, as the cement of our love
To keep it builded, be the ram to batter
The fortress of it. For better might we
Have loved without this mean, if on both parts
This be not cherished.

ANTONY  Make me not offended
In your distrust.

CAESAR  I have said.

ANTONY  You shall not find,
Though you be therein curious, the least cause
For what you seem to fear. So the gods keep you,
And make the hearts of Romans serve your ends.
We will here part.

CAESAR
Farewell, my dearest sister, fare thee well.
The elements be kind to thee and make
Thy spirits all of comfort. Fare thee well.

OCTAVIA  My noble brother.	[She weeps.]

ANTONY
The April's in her eyes. It is love's spring,
And these the showers to bring it on.--Be cheerful.

OCTAVIA, [to Caesar]
Sir, look well to my husband's house, and--

CAESAR
What, Octavia?

OCTAVIA  I'll tell you in your ear.
[Caesar and Octavia walk aside.]

ANTONY
Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can
Her heart inform her tongue--the swan's-down
feather
That stands upon the swell at the full of tide
And neither way inclines.

ENOBARBUS, [aside to Agrippa]  Will Caesar weep?

AGRIPPA  He has a cloud in 's face.

ENOBARBUS
He were the worse for that were he a horse;
So is he being a man.

AGRIPPA  Why, Enobarbus,
When Antony found Julius Caesar dead,
He cried almost to roaring. And he wept
When at Philippi he found Brutus slain.

ENOBARBUS
That year indeed he was troubled with a rheum.
What willingly he did confound he wailed,
Believe 't, till I wept too.

CAESAR, [coming forward with Octavia]  No, sweet Octavia,
You shall hear from me still. The time shall not
Outgo my thinking on you.

ANTONY  Come, sir, come,
I'll wrestle with you in my strength of love.
Look, here I have you, thus I let you go,
And give you to the gods.

CAESAR  Adieu, be happy.

LEPIDUS, [to Antony]
Let all the number of the stars give light
To thy fair way.

CAESAR  Farewell, farewell.	[Kisses Octavia.]

ANTONY  Farewell.
[Trumpets sound. They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras, and Alexas.]


CLEOPATRA
Where is the fellow?

ALEXAS  Half afeard to come.

CLEOPATRA
Go to, go to.--Come hither, sir.

[Enter the Messenger as before.]


ALEXAS  Good Majesty,
Herod of Jewry dare not look upon you
But when you are well pleased.

CLEOPATRA  That Herod's head
I'll have! But how, when Antony is gone,
Through whom I might command it?--Come thou
near.

MESSENGER
Most gracious Majesty!

CLEOPATRA  Did'st thou behold Octavia?

MESSENGER
Ay, dread queen.

CLEOPATRA  Where?

MESSENGER  Madam, in Rome.
I looked her in the face and saw her led
Between her brother and Mark Antony.

CLEOPATRA
Is she as tall as me?

MESSENGER  She is not, madam.

CLEOPATRA
Didst hear her speak? Is she shrill-tongued or low?

MESSENGER
Madam, I heard her speak. She is low-voiced.

CLEOPATRA
That's not so good. He cannot like her long.

CHARMIAN
Like her? O Isis, 'tis impossible!

CLEOPATRA
I think so, Charmian: dull of tongue, and
dwarfish!--
What majesty is in her gait? Remember,
If e'er thou looked'st on majesty.

MESSENGER  She creeps.
Her motion and her station are as one.
She shows a body rather than a life,
A statue than a breather.

CLEOPATRA  Is this certain?

MESSENGER
Or I have no observance.

CHARMIAN  Three in Egypt
Cannot make better note.

CLEOPATRA  He's very knowing.
I do perceive 't. There's nothing in her yet.
The fellow has good judgment.

CHARMIAN  Excellent.

CLEOPATRA, [to Messenger]  Guess at her years, I
prithee.

MESSENGER  Madam, she was a widow.

CLEOPATRA  Widow? Charmian, hark.

MESSENGER  And I do think she's thirty.

CLEOPATRA
Bear'st thou her face in mind? Is 't long or round?

MESSENGER  Round even to faultiness.

CLEOPATRA
For the most part, too, they are foolish that are so.
Her hair what color?

MESSENGER  Brown, madam, and her forehead
As low as she would wish it.

CLEOPATRA, [giving money]  There's gold for thee.
Thou must not take my former sharpness ill.
I will employ thee back again. I find thee
Most fit for business. Go, make thee ready.
Our letters are prepared.	[Messenger exits.]

CHARMIAN  A proper man.

CLEOPATRA
Indeed he is so. I repent me much
That so I harried him. Why, methinks, by him,
This creature's no such thing.

CHARMIAN  Nothing, madam.

CLEOPATRA
The man hath seen some majesty, and should know.

CHARMIAN
Hath he seen majesty? Isis else defend,
And serving you so long!

CLEOPATRA
I have one thing more to ask him yet, good
Charmian,
But 'tis no matter. Thou shalt bring him to me
Where I will write. All may be well enough.

CHARMIAN  I warrant you, madam.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Antony and Octavia.]


ANTONY
Nay, nay, Octavia, not only that--
That were excusable, that and thousands more
Of semblable import--but he hath waged
New wars 'gainst Pompey; made his will and read it
To public ear;
Spoke scantly of me; when perforce he could not
But pay me terms of honor, cold and sickly
He vented them, most narrow measure lent me;
When the best hint was given him, he not took 't,
Or did it from his teeth.

OCTAVIA  O, my good lord,
Believe not all, or if you must believe,
Stomach not all. A more unhappy lady,
If this division chance, ne'er stood between,
Praying for both parts.
The good gods will mock me presently
When I shall pray "O, bless my lord and husband!"
Undo that prayer by crying out as loud
"O, bless my brother!" Husband win, win brother
Prays and destroys the prayer; no midway
'Twixt these extremes at all.

ANTONY  Gentle Octavia,
Let your best love draw to that point which seeks
Best to preserve it. If I lose mine honor,
I lose myself; better I were not yours
Than yours so branchless. But, as you requested,
Yourself shall go between 's. The meantime, lady,
I'll raise the preparation of a war
Shall stain your brother. Make your soonest haste,
So your desires are yours.

OCTAVIA  Thanks to my lord.
The Jove of power make me, most weak, most weak,
Your reconciler. Wars 'twixt you twain would be
As if the world should cleave, and that slain men
Should solder up the rift.

ANTONY
When it appears to you where this begins,
Turn your displeasure that way, for our faults
Can never be so equal that your love
Can equally move with them. Provide your going;
Choose your own company, and command what cost
Your heart has mind to.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Enobarbus and Eros.]


ENOBARBUS  How now, friend Eros?

EROS  There's strange news come, sir.

ENOBARBUS  What, man?

EROS  Caesar and Lepidus have made wars upon
Pompey.

ENOBARBUS  This is old. What is the success?

EROS  Caesar, having made use of him in the wars
'gainst Pompey, presently denied him rivality,
would not let him partake in the glory of the action;
and, not resting here, accuses him of letters he had
formerly wrote to Pompey; upon his own appeal
seizes him. So the poor third is up, till death enlarge
his confine.

ENOBARBUS
Then, world, thou hast a pair of chaps, no more,
And throw between them all the food thou hast,
They'll grind the one the other. Where's Antony?

EROS
He's walking in the garden, thus, and spurns
The rush that lies before him; cries "Fool Lepidus!"
And threats the throat of that his officer
That murdered Pompey.

ENOBARBUS  Our great navy's rigged.

EROS
For Italy and Caesar. More, Domitius:
My lord desires you presently. My news
I might have told hereafter.

ENOBARBUS  'Twill be naught,
But let it be. Bring me to Antony.

EROS  Come, sir.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Agrippa, Maecenas, and Caesar.]


CAESAR
Contemning Rome, he has done all this and more
In Alexandria. Here's the manner of 't:
I' th' marketplace, on a tribunal silvered,
Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold
Were publicly enthroned. At the feet sat
Caesarion, whom they call my father's son,
And all the unlawful issue that their lust
Since then hath made between them. Unto her
He gave the stablishment of Egypt, made her
Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia,
Absolute queen.

MAECENAS  This in the public eye?

CAESAR
I' th' common showplace where they exercise.
His sons he there proclaimed the kings of kings.
Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia
He gave to Alexander; to Ptolemy he assigned
Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia. She
In th' habiliments of the goddess Isis
That day appeared, and oft before gave audience,
As 'tis reported, so.

MAECENAS  Let Rome be thus informed.

AGRIPPA
Who, queasy with his insolence already,
Will their good thoughts call from him.

CAESAR
The people knows it and have now received
His accusations.

AGRIPPA  Who does he accuse?

CAESAR
Caesar, and that, having in Sicily
Sextus Pompeius spoiled, we had not rated him
His part o' th' isle. Then does he say he lent me
Some shipping, unrestored. Lastly, he frets
That Lepidus of the triumvirate
Should be deposed and, being, that we detain
All his revenue.

AGRIPPA  Sir, this should be answered.

CAESAR
'Tis done already, and the messenger gone.
I have told him Lepidus was grown too cruel,
That he his high authority abused
And did deserve his change. For what I have
conquered,
I grant him part; but then in his Armenia
And other of his conquered kingdoms I
Demand the like.

MAECENAS  He'll never yield to that.

CAESAR
Nor must not then be yielded to in this.

[Enter Octavia with her Train.]


OCTAVIA
Hail, Caesar, and my lord! Hail, most dear Caesar.

CAESAR
That ever I should call thee castaway!

OCTAVIA
You have not called me so, nor have you cause.

CAESAR
Why have you stol'n upon us thus? You come not
Like Caesar's sister. The wife of Antony
Should have an army for an usher and
The neighs of horse to tell of her approach
Long ere she did appear. The trees by th' way
Should have borne men, and expectation fainted,
Longing for what it had not. Nay, the dust
Should have ascended to the roof of heaven,
Raised by your populous troops. But you are come
A market-maid to Rome, and have prevented
The ostentation of our love, which, left unshown,
Is often left unloved. We should have met you
By sea and land, supplying every stage
With an augmented greeting.

OCTAVIA  Good my lord,
To come thus was I not constrained, but did it
On my free will. My lord, Mark Antony,
Hearing that you prepared for war, acquainted
My grieved ear withal, whereon I begged
His pardon for return.

CAESAR  Which soon he granted,
Being an abstract 'tween his lust and him.

OCTAVIA
Do not say so, my lord.

CAESAR  I have eyes upon him,
And his affairs come to me on the wind.
Where is he now?

OCTAVIA  My lord, in Athens.

CAESAR
No, my most wronged sister. Cleopatra
Hath nodded him to her. He hath given his empire
Up to a whore, who now are levying
The kings o' th' Earth for war. He hath assembled
Bocchus, the King of Libya; Archelaus
Of Cappadocia; Philadelphos, King
Of Paphlagonia; the Thracian king, Adallas;
King Manchus of Arabia; King of Pont;
Herod of Jewry; Mithridates, King
Of Comagen; Polemon and Amyntas,
The Kings of Mede and Lycaonia,
With a more larger list of scepters.

OCTAVIA  Ay me, most wretched,
That have my heart parted betwixt two friends
That does afflict each other!

CAESAR  Welcome hither.
Your letters did withhold our breaking forth
Till we perceived both how you were wrong led
And we in negligent danger. Cheer your heart.
Be you not troubled with the time, which drives
O'er your content these strong necessities,
But let determined things to destiny
Hold unbewailed their way. Welcome to Rome,
Nothing more dear to me. You are abused
Beyond the mark of thought, and the high gods,
To do you justice, makes his ministers
Of us and those that love you. Best of comfort,
And ever welcome to us.

AGRIPPA  Welcome, lady.

MAECENAS  Welcome, dear madam.
Each heart in Rome does love and pity you;
Only th' adulterous Antony, most large
In his abominations, turns you off
And gives his potent regiment to a trull
That noises it against us.

OCTAVIA, [to Caesar]  Is it so, sir?

CAESAR
Most certain. Sister, welcome. Pray you
Be ever known to patience. My dear'st sister!
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter Cleopatra and Enobarbus.]


CLEOPATRA
I will be even with thee, doubt it not.

ENOBARBUS  But why, why, why?

CLEOPATRA
Thou hast forspoke my being in these wars
And say'st it is not fit.

ENOBARBUS  Well, is it, is it?

CLEOPATRA
Is 't not denounced against us? Why should not we
Be there in person?

ENOBARBUS  Well, I could reply:
If we should serve with horse and mares together,
The horse were merely lost. The mares would bear
A soldier and his horse.

CLEOPATRA  What is 't you say?

ENOBARBUS
Your presence needs must puzzle Antony,
Take from his heart, take from his brain, from 's time
What should not then be spared. He is already
Traduced for levity, and 'tis said in Rome
That Photinus, an eunuch, and your maids
Manage this war.

CLEOPATRA  Sink Rome, and their tongues rot
That speak against us! A charge we bear i' th' war,
And as the president of my kingdom will
Appear there for a man. Speak not against it.
I will not stay behind.

[Enter Antony and Canidius.]


ENOBARBUS  Nay, I have done.
Here comes the Emperor.

ANTONY  Is it not strange, Canidius,
That from Tarentum and Brundusium
He could so quickly cut the Ionian Sea
And take in Toryne?--You have heard on 't, sweet?

CLEOPATRA
Celerity is never more admired
Than by the negligent.

ANTONY  A good rebuke,
Which might have well becomed the best of men,
To taunt at slackness.--Canidius, we will fight
With him by sea.

CLEOPATRA  By sea, what else?

CANIDIUS  Why will
My lord do so?

ANTONY  For that he dares us to 't.

ENOBARBUS
So hath my lord dared him to single fight.

CANIDIUS
Ay, and to wage this battle at Pharsalia,
Where Caesar fought with Pompey. But these offers,
Which serve not for his vantage, he shakes off,
And so should you.

ENOBARBUS  Your ships are not well manned,
Your mariners are muleteers, reapers, people
Engrossed by swift impress. In Caesar's fleet
Are those that often have 'gainst Pompey fought.
Their ships are yare, yours heavy. No disgrace
Shall fall you for refusing him at sea,
Being prepared for land.

ANTONY  By sea, by sea.

ENOBARBUS
Most worthy sir, you therein throw away
The absolute soldiership you have by land,
Distract your army, which doth most consist
Of war-marked footmen, leave unexecuted
Your own renowned knowledge, quite forgo
The way which promises assurance, and
Give up yourself merely to chance and hazard
From firm security.

ANTONY  I'll fight at sea.

CLEOPATRA
I have sixty sails, Caesar none better.

ANTONY
Our overplus of shipping will we burn,
And with the rest full-manned, from th' head of
Actium
Beat th' approaching Caesar. But if we fail,
We then can do 't at land.

[Enter a Messenger.]

Thy business?

MESSENGER
The news is true, my lord; he is descried.
Caesar has taken Toryne.	[He exits.]

ANTONY
Can he be there in person? 'Tis impossible;
Strange that his power should be. Canidius,
Our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land,
And our twelve thousand horse. We'll to our ship.--
Away, my Thetis.

[Enter a Soldier.]

How now, worthy soldier?

SOLDIER
O noble emperor, do not fight by sea!
Trust not to rotten planks. Do you misdoubt
This sword and these my wounds? Let th' Egyptians
And the Phoenicians go a-ducking. We
Have used to conquer standing on the earth
And fighting foot to foot.

ANTONY  Well, well, away.
[Antony, Cleopatra, and Enobarbus exit.]

SOLDIER
By Hercules, I think I am i' th' right.

CANIDIUS
Soldier, thou art, but his whole action grows
Not in the power on 't. So our leader's led,
And we are women's men.

SOLDIER  You keep by land
The legions and the horse whole, do you not?

CANIDIUS
Marcus Octavius, Marcus Justeius,
Publicola, and Caelius are for sea,
But we keep whole by land. This speed of Caesar's
Carries beyond belief.

SOLDIER  While he was yet in Rome,
His power went out in such distractions as
Beguiled all spies.

CANIDIUS  Who's his lieutenant, hear you?

SOLDIER
They say one Taurus.

CANIDIUS  Well I know the man.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER  The Emperor calls Canidius.

CANIDIUS
With news the time's in labor, and throws forth
Each minute some.
[They exit.]

Scene 8
=======
[Enter Caesar with his army, and Taurus, marching.]


CAESAR  Taurus!

TAURUS  My lord?

CAESAR
Strike not by land, keep whole. Provoke not battle
Till we have done at sea. Do not exceed
The prescript of this scroll.	[Hands him a scroll.]
Our fortune lies
Upon this jump.
[They exit.]

Scene 9
=======
[Enter Antony and Enobarbus.]


ANTONY
Set we our squadrons on yond side o' th' hill
In eye of Caesar's battle, from which place
We may the number of the ships behold
And so proceed accordingly.
[They exit.]

Scene 10
========
[Canidius marcheth with his land army one way
over the stage, and Taurus the lieutenant of Caesar
the other way. After their going in is heard the
noise of a sea fight.]


[Alarum. Enter Enobarbus.]


ENOBARBUS
Naught, naught, all naught! I can behold no longer.
Th' Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral,
With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder.
To see 't mine eyes are blasted.

[Enter Scarus.]


SCARUS  Gods and goddesses,
All the whole synod of them!

ENOBARBUS  What's thy passion?

SCARUS
The greater cantle of the world is lost
With very ignorance. We have kissed away
Kingdoms and provinces.

ENOBARBUS  How appears the fight?

SCARUS
On our side, like the tokened pestilence,
Where death is sure. Yon ribaudred nag of Egypt,
Whom leprosy o'ertake, i' th' midst o' th' fight,
When vantage like a pair of twins appeared
Both as the same--or, rather, ours the elder--
The breeze upon her like a cow in June,
Hoists sails and flies.

ENOBARBUS  That I beheld.
Mine eyes did sicken at the sight and could not
Endure a further view.

SCARUS  She once being loofed,
The noble ruin of her magic, Antony,
Claps on his sea-wing and, like a doting mallard,
Leaving the fight in height, flies after her.
I never saw an action of such shame.
Experience, manhood, honor ne'er before
Did violate so itself.

ENOBARBUS  Alack, alack.

[Enter Canidius.]


CANIDIUS
Our fortune on the sea is out of breath
And sinks most lamentably. Had our general
Been what he knew himself, it had gone well.
O, he has given example for our flight
Most grossly by his own.

ENOBARBUS
Ay, are you thereabouts? Why then goodnight
indeed.

CANIDIUS  Toward Peloponnesus are they fled.

SCARUS
'Tis easy to 't, and there I will attend
What further comes.	[He exits.]

CANIDIUS  To Caesar will I render
My legions and my horse. Six kings already
Show me the way of yielding.	[He exits.]

ENOBARBUS  I'll yet follow
The wounded chance of Antony, though my reason
Sits in the wind against me.
[He exits.]

Scene 11
========
[Enter Antony with Attendants.]


ANTONY
Hark, the land bids me tread no more upon 't.
It is ashamed to bear me. Friends, come hither.
I am so lated in the world that I
Have lost my way forever. I have a ship
Laden with gold. Take that, divide it. Fly,
And make your peace with Caesar.

ALL  Fly? Not we!

ANTONY
I have fled myself and have instructed cowards
To run and show their shoulders. Friends, begone.
I have myself resolved upon a course
Which has no need of you. Begone.
My treasure's in the harbor; take it. O,
I followed that I blush to look upon!
My very hairs do mutiny, for the white
Reprove the brown for rashness, and they them
For fear and doting. Friends, begone. You shall
Have letters from me to some friends that will
Sweep your way for you. Pray you look not sad,
Nor make replies of loathness. Take the hint
Which my despair proclaims. Let that be left
Which leaves itself. To the seaside straightway!
I will possess you of that ship and treasure.
Leave me, I pray, a little--pray you, now,
Nay, do so--for indeed I have lost command.
Therefore I pray you--I'll see you by and by.
[Attendants move aside. Antony sits down.]

[Enter Cleopatra led by Charmian, Iras, and Eros.]


EROS
Nay, gentle madam, to him, comfort him.

IRAS  Do, most dear queen.

CHARMIAN  Do! Why, what else?

CLEOPATRA  Let me sit down. O Juno!	[She sits down.]

ANTONY  No, no, no, no, no.

EROS  See you here, sir?

ANTONY  Oh fie, fie, fie!

CHARMIAN  Madam.

IRAS  Madam, O good empress!

EROS  Sir, sir--

ANTONY
Yes, my lord, yes. He at Philippi kept
His sword e'en like a dancer, while I struck
The lean and wrinkled Cassius, and 'twas I
That the mad Brutus ended. He alone
Dealt on lieutenantry, and no practice had
In the brave squares of war, yet now--no matter.

CLEOPATRA
Ah, stand by.

EROS  The Queen, my lord, the Queen.

IRAS
Go to him, madam; speak to him.
He's unqualitied with very shame.

CLEOPATRA, [rising]  Well, then, sustain me. O!

EROS
Most noble sir, arise. The Queen approaches.
Her head's declined, and death will seize her but
Your comfort makes the rescue.

ANTONY  I have offended reputation,
A most unnoble swerving.

EROS  Sir, the Queen.

ANTONY, [rising]
O, whither hast them led me, Egypt? See
How I convey my shame out of thine eyes,
By looking back what I have left behind
'Stroyed in dishonor.

CLEOPATRA  O, my lord, my lord,
Forgive my fearful sails! I little thought
You would have followed.

ANTONY  Egypt, thou knew'st too well
My heart was to thy rudder tied by th' strings,
And thou shouldst tow me after. O'er my spirit
Thy full supremacy thou knew'st, and that
Thy beck might from the bidding of the gods
Command me.

CLEOPATRA  O, my pardon!

ANTONY  Now I must
To the young man send humble treaties, dodge
And palter in the shifts of lowness, who
With half the bulk o' th' world played as I pleased,
Making and marring fortunes. You did know
How much you were my conqueror, and that
My sword, made weak by my affection, would
Obey it on all cause.

CLEOPATRA  Pardon, pardon!

ANTONY
Fall not a tear, I say; one of them rates
All that is won and lost. Give me a kiss.	[They kiss.]
Even this repays me.--
We sent our schoolmaster. Is he come back?--
Love, I am full of lead.--Some wine
Within there, and our viands! Fortune knows
We scorn her most when most she offers blows.
[They exit.]

Scene 12
========
[Enter Caesar, Agrippa, Thidias, and
Dolabella, with others.]


CAESAR
Let him appear that's come from Antony.
Know you him?

DOLABELLA  Caesar, 'tis his schoolmaster--
An argument that he is plucked, when hither
He sends so poor a pinion of his wing,
Which had superfluous kings for messengers
Not many moons gone by.

[Enter Ambassador from Antony.]


CAESAR  Approach, and speak.

AMBASSADOR
Such as I am, I come from Antony.
I was of late as petty to his ends
As is the morn-dew on the myrtle leaf
To his grand sea.

CAESAR  Be 't so. Declare thine office.

AMBASSADOR
Lord of his fortunes he salutes thee, and
Requires to live in Egypt, which not granted,
He lessens his requests, and to thee sues
To let him breathe between the heavens and Earth,
A private man in Athens. This for him.
Next, Cleopatra does confess thy greatness,
Submits her to thy might, and of thee craves
The circle of the Ptolemies for her heirs,
Now hazarded to thy grace.

CAESAR  For Antony,
I have no ears to his request. The Queen
Of audience nor desire shall fail, so she
From Egypt drive her all-disgraced friend,
Or take his life there. This if she perform,
She shall not sue unheard. So to them both.

AMBASSADOR
Fortune pursue thee!

CAESAR  Bring him through the bands.
[Ambassador exits, with Attendants.]
[To Thidias.] To try thy eloquence now 'tis time.
Dispatch.
From Antony win Cleopatra. Promise,
And in our name, what she requires; add more,
From thine invention, offers. Women are not
In their best fortunes strong, but want will perjure
The ne'er-touched vestal. Try thy cunning, Thidias.
Make thine own edict for thy pains, which we
Will answer as a law.

THIDIAS  Caesar, I go.

CAESAR
Observe how Antony becomes his flaw,
And what thou think'st his very action speaks
In every power that moves.

THIDIAS  Caesar, I shall.
[They exit.]

Scene 13
========
[Enter Cleopatra, Enobarbus, Charmian, and Iras.]


CLEOPATRA
What shall we do, Enobarbus?

ENOBARBUS  Think, and die.

CLEOPATRA
Is Antony or we in fault for this?

ENOBARBUS
Antony only, that would make his will
Lord of his reason. What though you fled
From that great face of war, whose several ranges
Frighted each other? Why should he follow?
The itch of his affection should not then
Have nicked his captainship, at such a point,
When half to half the world opposed, he being
The mered question. 'Twas a shame no less
Than was his loss, to course your flying flags
And leave his navy gazing.

CLEOPATRA  Prithee, peace.

[Enter the Ambassador with Antony.]


ANTONY  Is that his answer?

AMBASSADOR  Ay, my lord.

ANTONY
The Queen shall then have courtesy, so she
Will yield us up?

AMBASSADOR  He says so.

ANTONY  Let her know 't.--
To the boy Caesar send this grizzled head,
And he will fill thy wishes to the brim
With principalities.

CLEOPATRA  That head, my lord?

ANTONY, [to Ambassador]
To him again. Tell him he wears the rose
Of youth upon him, from which the world should
note
Something particular: his coin, ships, legions
May be a coward's, whose ministers would prevail
Under the service of a child as soon
As i' th' command of Caesar. I dare him therefore
To lay his gay caparisons apart
And answer me declined, sword against sword,
Ourselves alone. I'll write it. Follow me.
[Antony and Ambassador exit.]

ENOBARBUS, [aside]
Yes, like enough, high-battled Caesar will
Unstate his happiness and be staged to th' show
Against a sworder! I see men's judgments are
A parcel of their fortunes, and things outward
Do draw the inward quality after them
To suffer all alike. That he should dream,
Knowing all measures, the full Caesar will
Answer his emptiness! Caesar, thou hast subdued
His judgment too.

[Enter a Servant.]


SERVANT  A messenger from Caesar.

CLEOPATRA
What, no more ceremony? See, my women,
Against the blown rose may they stop their nose
That kneeled unto the buds.--Admit him, sir.
[Servant exits.]

ENOBARBUS, [aside]
Mine honesty and I begin to square.
The loyalty well held to fools does make
Our faith mere folly. Yet he that can endure
To follow with allegiance a fall'n lord
Does conquer him that did his master conquer,
And earns a place i' th' story.

[Enter Thidias.]


CLEOPATRA  Caesar's will?

THIDIAS
Hear it apart.

CLEOPATRA  None but friends. Say boldly.

THIDIAS
So haply are they friends to Antony.

ENOBARBUS
He needs as many, sir, as Caesar has,
Or needs not us. If Caesar please, our master
Will leap to be his friend. For us, you know
Whose he is we are, and that is Caesar's.

THIDIAS  So.--
Thus then, thou most renowned: Caesar entreats
Not to consider in what case thou stand'st
Further than he is Caesar.

CLEOPATRA  Go on; right royal.

THIDIAS
He knows that you embrace not Antony
As you did love, but as you feared him.

CLEOPATRA  O!

THIDIAS
The scars upon your honor therefore he
Does pity as constrained blemishes,
Not as deserved.

CLEOPATRA  He is a god and knows
What is most right. Mine honor was not yielded,
But conquered merely.

ENOBARBUS, [aside]  To be sure of that,
I will ask Antony. Sir, sir, thou art so leaky
That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for
Thy dearest quit thee.	[Enobarbus exits.]

THIDIAS  Shall I say to Caesar
What you require of him? For he partly begs
To be desired to give. It much would please him
That of his fortunes you should make a staff
To lean upon. But it would warm his spirits
To hear from me you had left Antony
And put yourself under his shroud,
The universal landlord.

CLEOPATRA  What's your name?

THIDIAS
My name is Thidias.

CLEOPATRA  Most kind messenger,
Say to great Caesar this in deputation:
I kiss his conqu'ring hand. Tell him I am prompt
To lay my crown at 's feet, and there to kneel.
Tell him, from his all-obeying breath I hear
The doom of Egypt.

THIDIAS  'Tis your noblest course.
Wisdom and fortune combating together,
If that the former dare but what it can,
No chance may shake it. Give me grace to lay
My duty on your hand.
[She gives him her hand to kiss.]

CLEOPATRA  Your Caesar's father oft,
When he hath mused of taking kingdoms in,
Bestowed his lips on that unworthy place
As it rained kisses.

[Enter Antony and Enobarbus.]


ANTONY  Favors? By Jove that thunders!
What art thou, fellow?

THIDIAS  One that but performs
The bidding of the fullest man and worthiest
To have command obeyed.

ENOBARBUS  You will be whipped.

ANTONY, [calling for Servants]
Approach there!--Ah, you kite!--Now, gods and
devils,
Authority melts from me. Of late when I cried "Ho!"
Like boys unto a muss kings would start forth
And cry "Your will?" Have you no ears? I am
Antony yet.

[Enter Servants.]

Take hence this jack and whip him.

ENOBARBUS, [aside]
'Tis better playing with a lion's whelp
Than with an old one dying.

ANTONY  Moon and stars!
Whip him! Were 't twenty of the greatest tributaries
That do acknowledge Caesar, should I find them
So saucy with the hand of she here--what's her
name
Since she was Cleopatra? Whip him, fellows,
Till like a boy you see him cringe his face
And whine aloud for mercy. Take him hence.

THIDIAS
Mark Antony--

ANTONY  Tug him away. Being whipped,
Bring him again. This jack of Caesar's shall
Bear us an errand to him.
[Servants exit with Thidias.]
[To Cleopatra.] You were half blasted ere I knew you.
Ha!
Have I my pillow left unpressed in Rome,
Forborne the getting of a lawful race,
And by a gem of women, to be abused
By one that looks on feeders?

CLEOPATRA  Good my lord--

ANTONY  You have been a boggler ever.
But when we in our viciousness grow hard--
O, misery on 't!--the wise gods seel our eyes,
In our own filth drop our clear judgments, make us
Adore our errors, laugh at 's while we strut
To our confusion.

CLEOPATRA  O, is 't come to this?

ANTONY
I found you as a morsel cold upon
Dead Caesar's trencher; nay, you were a fragment
Of Gneius Pompey's, besides what hotter hours,
Unregistered in vulgar fame, you have
Luxuriously picked out. For I am sure,
Though you can guess what temperance should be,
You know not what it is.

CLEOPATRA  Wherefore is this?

ANTONY
To let a fellow that will take rewards
And say "God quit you!" be familiar with
My playfellow, your hand, this kingly seal
And plighter of high hearts! O, that I were
Upon the hill of Basan, to outroar
The horned herd! For I have savage cause,
And to proclaim it civilly were like
A haltered neck which does the hangman thank
For being yare about him.

[Enter a Servant with Thidias.]

Is he whipped?

SERVANT  Soundly, my lord.

ANTONY  Cried he? And begged he pardon?

SERVANT  He did ask favor.

ANTONY, [to Thidias]
If that thy father live, let him repent
Thou wast not made his daughter; and be thou sorry
To follow Caesar in his triumph, since
Thou hast been whipped for following him.
Henceforth
The white hand of a lady fever thee;
Shake thou to look on 't. Get thee back to Caesar.
Tell him thy entertainment. Look thou say
He makes me angry with him; for he seems
Proud and disdainful, harping on what I am,
Not what he knew I was. He makes me angry,
And at this time most easy 'tis to do 't,
When my good stars that were my former guides
Have empty left their orbs and shot their fires
Into th' abysm of hell. If he mislike
My speech and what is done, tell him he has
Hipparchus, my enfranched bondman, whom
He may at pleasure whip, or hang, or torture,
As he shall like to quit me. Urge it thou.
Hence with thy stripes, begone!	[Thidias exits.]

CLEOPATRA  Have you done yet?

ANTONY
Alack, our terrene moon is now eclipsed,
And it portends alone the fall of Antony.

CLEOPATRA  I must stay his time.

ANTONY
To flatter Caesar, would you mingle eyes
With one that ties his points?

CLEOPATRA  Not know me yet?

ANTONY
Coldhearted toward me?

CLEOPATRA  Ah, dear, if I be so,
From my cold heart let heaven engender hail
And poison it in the source, and the first stone
Drop in my neck; as it determines, so
Dissolve my life! The next Caesarion smite,
Till by degrees the memory of my womb,
Together with my brave Egyptians all,
By the discandying of this pelleted storm
Lie graveless till the flies and gnats of Nile
Have buried them for prey!

ANTONY  I am satisfied.
Caesar sits down in Alexandria, where
I will oppose his fate. Our force by land
Hath nobly held; our severed navy too
Have knit again, and fleet, threatening most sealike.
Where hast thou been, my heart? Dost thou hear,
lady?
If from the field I shall return once more
To kiss these lips, I will appear in blood.
I and my sword will earn our chronicle.
There's hope in 't yet.

CLEOPATRA  That's my brave lord!

ANTONY
I will be treble-sinewed, -hearted, -breathed,
And fight maliciously; for when mine hours
Were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives
Of me for jests. But now I'll set my teeth
And send to darkness all that stop me. Come,
Let's have one other gaudy night. Call to me
All my sad captains. Fill our bowls once more.
Let's mock the midnight bell.

CLEOPATRA  It is my birthday.
I had thought t' have held it poor. But since my lord
Is Antony again, I will be Cleopatra.

ANTONY  We will yet do well.

CLEOPATRA
Call all his noble captains to my lord.

ANTONY
Do so; we'll speak to them, and tonight I'll force
The wine peep through their scars.--Come on, my
queen,
There's sap in 't yet. The next time I do fight
I'll make Death love me, for I will contend
Even with his pestilent scythe.
[All but Enobarbus exit.]

ENOBARBUS
Now he'll outstare the lightning. To be furious
Is to be frighted out of fear, and in that mood
The dove will peck the estridge; and I see still
A diminution in our captain's brain
Restores his heart. When valor preys on reason,
It eats the sword it fights with. I will seek
Some way to leave him.
[He exits.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Caesar, Agrippa, and Maecenas, with his army,
Caesar reading a letter.]


CAESAR
He calls me "boy," and chides as he had power
To beat me out of Egypt. My messenger
He hath whipped with rods, dares me to personal
combat,
Caesar to Antony. Let the old ruffian know
I have many other ways to die; meantime
Laugh at his challenge.

MAECENAS  Caesar must think,
When one so great begins to rage, he's hunted
Even to falling. Give him no breath, but now
Make boot of his distraction. Never anger
Made good guard for itself.

CAESAR  Let our best heads
Know that tomorrow the last of many battles
We mean to fight. Within our files there are,
Of those that served Mark Antony but late,
Enough to fetch him in. See it done,
And feast the army; we have store to do 't,
And they have earned the waste. Poor Antony.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Antony, Cleopatra, Enobarbus, Charmian, Iras,
with others.]


ANTONY
He will not fight with me, Domitius?

ENOBARBUS  No.

ANTONY  Why should he not?

ENOBARBUS
He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,
He is twenty men to one.

ANTONY  Tomorrow, soldier,
By sea and land I'll fight. Or I will live
Or bathe my dying honor in the blood
Shall make it live again. Woo't thou fight well?

ENOBARBUS
I'll strike and cry "Take all."

ANTONY  Well said. Come on.
Call forth my household servants.

[Enter three or four Servitors.]

Let's tonight
Be bounteous at our meal.--Give me thy hand;
Thou hast been rightly honest.--So hast thou,--
Thou,--and thou,--and thou. You have served me
well,
And kings have been your fellows.

CLEOPATRA, [aside to Enobarbus]  What means this?

ENOBARBUS, [aside to Cleopatra]
'Tis one of those odd tricks which sorrow shoots
Out of the mind.

ANTONY, [to another Servitor]  And thou art honest too.
I wish I could be made so many men,
And all of you clapped up together in
An Antony, that I might do you service
So good as you have done.

ALL THE SERVITORS  The gods forbid!

ANTONY
Well, my good fellows, wait on me tonight.
Scant not my cups, and make as much of me
As when mine empire was your fellow too
And suffered my command.

CLEOPATRA, [aside to Enobarbus]  What does he mean?

ENOBARBUS, [aside to Cleopatra]
To make his followers weep.

ANTONY, [to the Servitors]  Tend me tonight;
May be it is the period of your duty.
Haply you shall not see me more, or if,
A mangled shadow. Perchance tomorrow
You'll serve another master. I look on you
As one that takes his leave. Mine honest friends,
I turn you not away, but, like a master
Married to your good service, stay till death.
Tend me tonight two hours--I ask no more--
And the gods yield you for 't!

ENOBARBUS  What mean you, sir,
To give them this discomfort? Look, they weep,
And I, an ass, am onion-eyed. For shame,
Transform us not to women.

ANTONY  Ho, ho, ho!
Now the witch take me if I meant it thus!
Grace grow where those drops fall! My hearty
friends,
You take me in too dolorous a sense,
For I spake to you for your comfort, did desire you
To burn this night with torches. Know, my hearts,
I hope well of tomorrow, and will lead you
Where rather I'll expect victorious life
Than death and honor. Let's to supper, come,
And drown consideration.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter a company of Soldiers.]


FIRST SOLDIER
Brother, goodnight. Tomorrow is the day.

SECOND SOLDIER
It will determine one way. Fare you well.
Heard you of nothing strange about the streets?

FIRST SOLDIER  Nothing. What news?

SECOND SOLDIER
Belike 'tis but a rumor. Goodnight to you.

FIRST SOLDIER  Well, sir, goodnight.

[They meet other Soldiers who are entering.]


SECOND SOLDIER  Soldiers, have careful watch.

THIRD SOLDIER  And you. Goodnight, goodnight.

[They place themselves in every corner of the stage.]



SECOND SOLDIER  Here we; and if tomorrow
Our navy thrive, I have an absolute hope
Our landmen will stand up.

FIRST SOLDIER  'Tis a brave army, and full of purpose.

[Music of the hautboys is under the stage.]



SECOND SOLDIER  Peace. What noise?

FIRST SOLDIER  List, list!

SECOND SOLDIER  Hark!

FIRST SOLDIER  Music i' th' air.

THIRD SOLDIER  Under the earth.

FOURTH SOLDIER  It signs well, does it not?

THIRD SOLDIER  No.

FIRST SOLDIER  Peace, I say. What should this mean?

SECOND SOLDIER
'Tis the god Hercules, whom Antony loved,
Now leaves him.

FIRST SOLDIER  Walk. Let's see if other watchmen
Do hear what we do.

SECOND SOLDIER  How now, masters?	[Speak together.]

ALL  How now? How now? Do you hear this?

FIRST SOLDIER  Ay. Is 't not strange?

THIRD SOLDIER  Do you hear, masters? Do you hear?

FIRST SOLDIER
Follow the noise so far as we have quarter.
Let's see how it will give off.

ALL  Content. 'Tis strange.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Antony and Cleopatra, with
Charmian, and others.]


ANTONY, [calling]
Eros! Mine armor, Eros!

CLEOPATRA  Sleep a little.

ANTONY
No, my chuck.--Eros, come, mine armor, Eros.

[Enter Eros, carrying armor.]

Come, good fellow, put thine iron on.
If fortune be not ours today, it is
Because we brave her. Come.

CLEOPATRA  Nay, I'll help too.
What's this for?

ANTONY  Ah, let be, let be! Thou art
The armorer of my heart. False, false. This, this!

CLEOPATRA
Sooth, la, I'll help. Thus it must be.

ANTONY  Well, well,
We shall thrive now.--Seest thou, my good fellow?
Go, put on thy defenses.

EROS  Briefly, sir.

CLEOPATRA
Is not this buckled well?

ANTONY  Rarely, rarely.
He that unbuckles this, till we do please
To daff 't for our repose, shall hear a storm.--
Thou fumblest, Eros, and my queen's a squire
More tight at this than thou. Dispatch.--O love,
That thou couldst see my wars today, and knew'st
The royal occupation, thou shouldst see
A workman in 't.

[Enter an armed Soldier.]

Good morrow to thee. Welcome.
Thou look'st like him that knows a warlike charge.
To business that we love we rise betime
And go to 't with delight.

SOLDIER  A thousand, sir,
Early though 't be, have on their riveted trim
And at the port expect you.	[Shout. Trumpets flourish.]

[Enter Captains and Soldiers.]


CAPTAIN
The morn is fair. Good morrow, general.

ALL
Good morrow, general.

ANTONY  'Tis well blown, lads.
This morning, like the spirit of a youth
That means to be of note, begins betimes.
So, so.--Come, give me that. This way.--Well said.--
Fare thee well, dame.	[He kisses her.]
Whate'er becomes of me,
This is a soldier's kiss. Rebukable
And worthy shameful check it were to stand
On more mechanic compliment. I'll leave thee
Now like a man of steel.--You that will fight,
Follow me close. I'll bring you to 't.--Adieu.
[Antony, Eros, Captains, and Soldiers exit.]

CHARMIAN
Please you retire to your chamber?

CLEOPATRA  Lead me.
He goes forth gallantly. That he and Caesar might
Determine this great war in single fight,
Then Antony--but now--. Well, on.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Trumpets sound. Enter Antony and Eros, and a Soldier
who meets them.]


SOLDIER
The gods make this a happy day to Antony.

ANTONY
Would thou and those thy scars had once prevailed
To make me fight at land.

SOLDIER  Had'st thou done so,
The kings that have revolted and the soldier
That has this morning left thee would have still
Followed thy heels.

ANTONY  Who's gone this morning?

SOLDIER  Who?
One ever near thee. Call for Enobarbus,
He shall not hear thee, or from Caesar's camp
Say "I am none of thine."

ANTONY  What sayest thou?

SOLDIER  Sir,
He is with Caesar.

EROS  Sir, his chests and treasure
He has not with him.

ANTONY  Is he gone?

SOLDIER  Most certain.

ANTONY
Go, Eros, send his treasure after. Do it.
Detain no jot, I charge thee. Write to him--
I will subscribe--gentle adieus and greetings.
Say that I wish he never find more cause
To change a master. O, my fortunes have
Corrupted honest men. Dispatch.--Enobarbus!
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Flourish. Enter Agrippa, Caesar, with
Enobarbus and Dolabella.]


CAESAR
Go forth, Agrippa, and begin the fight.
Our will is Antony be took alive;
Make it so known.

AGRIPPA  Caesar, I shall.	[He exits.]

CAESAR
The time of universal peace is near.
Prove this a prosp'rous day, the three-nooked world
Shall bear the olive freely.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER  Antony
Is come into the field.

CAESAR  Go charge Agrippa
Plant those that have revolted in the vant
That Antony may seem to spend his fury
Upon himself.	[All but Enobarbus exit.]

ENOBARBUS
Alexas did revolt and went to Jewry on
Affairs of Antony, there did dissuade
Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar
And leave his master Antony. For this pains,
Caesar hath hanged him. Canidius and the rest
That fell away have entertainment but
No honorable trust. I have done ill,
Of which I do accuse myself so sorely
That I will joy no more.

[Enter a Soldier of Caesar's.]


SOLDIER  Enobarbus, Antony
Hath after thee sent all thy treasure, with
His bounty overplus. The messenger
Came on my guard, and at thy tent is now
Unloading of his mules.

ENOBARBUS  I give it you.

SOLDIER  Mock not, Enobarbus.
I tell you true. Best you safed the bringer
Out of the host. I must attend mine office
Or would have done 't myself. Your emperor
Continues still a Jove.	[He exits.]

ENOBARBUS
I am alone the villain of the Earth,
And feel I am so most. O Antony,
Thou mine of bounty, how wouldst thou have paid
My better service, when my turpitude
Thou dost so crown with gold! This blows my
heart.
If swift thought break it not, a swifter mean
Shall outstrike thought, but thought will do 't, I feel.
I fight against thee? No. I will go seek
Some ditch wherein to die; the foul'st best fits
My latter part of life.
[He exits.]

Scene 7
=======
[Alarum, Drums and Trumpets. Enter Agrippa,
with other of Caesar's soldiers.]


AGRIPPA
Retire! We have engaged ourselves too far.
Caesar himself has work, and our oppression
Exceeds what we expected.	[They exit.]

[Alarums. Enter Antony, and Scarus wounded.]


SCARUS
O my brave emperor, this is fought indeed!
Had we done so at first, we had droven them home
With clouts about their heads.

ANTONY  Thou bleed'st apace.

SCARUS
I had a wound here that was like a T,
But now 'tis made an H.	[Sound of retreat far off.]

ANTONY  They do retire.

SCARUS
We'll beat 'em into bench-holes. I have yet
Room for six scotches more.

[Enter Eros.]


EROS
They are beaten, sir, and our advantage serves
For a fair victory.

SCARUS  Let us score their backs
And snatch 'em up as we take hares, behind.
'Tis sport to maul a runner.

ANTONY  I will reward thee
Once for thy sprightly comfort and tenfold
For thy good valor. Come thee on.

SCARUS  I'll halt after.
[They exit.]

Scene 8
=======
[Alarum. Enter Antony again in a march;
Scarus, with others.]


ANTONY
We have beat him to his camp. Run one before
And let the Queen know of our gests.
[A Soldier exits.]
Tomorrow
Before the sun shall see 's, we'll spill the blood
That has today escaped. I thank you all,
For doughty-handed are you, and have fought
Not as you served the cause, but as 't had been
Each man's like mine. You have shown all Hectors.
Enter the city. Clip your wives, your friends.
Tell them your feats, whilst they with joyful tears
Wash the congealment from your wounds and kiss
The honored gashes whole.

[Enter Cleopatra.]

[To Scarus.] Give me thy hand.
To this great fairy I'll commend thy acts,
Make her thanks bless thee.--O, thou day o' th'
world,
Chain mine armed neck. Leap thou, attire and all,
Through proof of harness to my heart, and there
Ride on the pants triumphing.

CLEOPATRA  Lord of lords!
O infinite virtue, com'st thou smiling from
The world's great snare uncaught?

ANTONY  Mine nightingale,
We have beat them to their beds. What, girl, though
gray
Do something mingle with our younger brown, yet
ha' we
A brain that nourishes our nerves and can
Get goal for goal of youth. Behold this man.
Commend unto his lips thy favoring hand.--
Kiss it, my warrior.	[Scarus kisses her hand.]
He hath fought today
As if a god in hate of mankind had
Destroyed in such a shape.

CLEOPATRA, [to Scarus]  I'll give thee, friend,
An armor all of gold. It was a king's.

ANTONY
He has deserved it, were it carbuncled
Like holy Phoebus' car. Give me thy hand.
Through Alexandria make a jolly march.
Bear our hacked targets like the men that owe
them.
Had our great palace the capacity
To camp this host, we all would sup together
And drink carouses to the next day's fate,
Which promises royal peril.--Trumpeters,
With brazen din blast you the city's ear.
Make mingle with our rattling taborins,
That heaven and Earth may strike their sounds
together,
Applauding our approach.
[They exit.]

Scene 9
=======
[Enter a Sentry and his company. Enobarbus follows.]


SENTRY
If we be not relieved within this hour,
We must return to th' court of guard. The night
Is shiny, and they say we shall embattle
By th' second hour i' th' morn.

FIRST WATCH  This last day was a shrewd one to 's.

ENOBARBUS  O, bear me witness, night--

SECOND WATCH  What man is this?

FIRST WATCH  Stand close, and list him.

ENOBARBUS
Be witness to me, O thou blessed moon,
When men revolted shall upon record
Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did
Before thy face repent.

SENTRY  Enobarbus?

SECOND WATCH  Peace! Hark further.

ENOBARBUS
O sovereign mistress of true melancholy,
The poisonous damp of night dispunge upon me,
That life, a very rebel to my will,
May hang no longer on me. Throw my heart
Against the flint and hardness of my fault,
Which, being dried with grief, will break to powder
And finish all foul thoughts. O Antony,
Nobler than my revolt is infamous,
Forgive me in thine own particular,
But let the world rank me in register
A master-leaver and a fugitive.
O Antony! O Antony!	[He dies.]

FIRST WATCH  Let's speak to him.

SENTRY  Let's hear him, for the things he speaks may
concern Caesar.

SECOND WATCH  Let's do so. But he sleeps.

SENTRY
Swoons rather, for so bad a prayer as his
Was never yet for sleep.

FIRST WATCH  Go we to him.

SECOND WATCH  Awake, sir, awake! Speak to us.

FIRST WATCH  Hear you, sir?

SENTRY
The hand of death hath raught him.	[Drums afar off.]
Hark, the drums
Demurely wake the sleepers. Let us bear him
To th' court of guard; he is of note. Our hour
Is fully out.

SECOND WATCH  Come on then. He may recover yet.
[They exit, carrying Enobarbus' body.]

Scene 10
========
[Enter Antony and Scarus, with their army.]


ANTONY
Their preparation is today by sea;
We please them not by land.

SCARUS  For both, my lord.

ANTONY
I would they'd fight i' th' fire or i' th' air;
We'd fight there too. But this it is: our foot
Upon the hills adjoining to the city
Shall stay with us--order for sea is given;
They have put forth the haven--
Where their appointment we may best discover
And look on their endeavor.
[They exit.]

Scene 11
========
[Enter Caesar and his army.]


CAESAR
But being charged, we will be still by land--
Which, as I take 't, we shall, for his best force
Is forth to man his galleys. To the vales,
And hold our best advantage.
[They exit.]

Scene 12
========
[Enter Antony and Scarus.]


ANTONY
Yet they are not joined. Where yond pine does stand,
I shall discover all. I'll bring thee word
Straight how 'tis like to go.	[He exits.]
[Alarum afar off, as at a sea fight.]

SCARUS  Swallows have built
In Cleopatra's sails their nests. The augurs
Say they know not, they cannot tell, look grimly
And dare not speak their knowledge. Antony
Is valiant and dejected, and by starts
His fretted fortunes give him hope and fear
Of what he has and has not.

[Enter Antony.]


ANTONY  All is lost!
This foul Egyptian hath betrayed me.
My fleet hath yielded to the foe, and yonder
They cast their caps up and carouse together
Like friends long lost. Triple-turned whore! 'Tis thou
Hast sold me to this novice, and my heart
Makes only wars on thee. Bid them all fly--
For when I am revenged upon my charm,
I have done all. Bid them all fly. Begone!
[Scarus exits.]
O sun, thy uprise shall I see no more.
Fortune and Antony part here; even here
Do we shake hands. All come to this? The hearts
That spanieled me at heels, to whom I gave
Their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets
On blossoming Caesar, and this pine is barked
That overtopped them all. Betrayed I am.
O, this false soul of Egypt! This grave charm,
Whose eye becked forth my wars and called them
home,
Whose bosom was my crownet, my chief end,
Like a right gypsy hath at fast and loose
Beguiled me to the very heart of loss.--
What Eros, Eros!

[Enter Cleopatra.]

Ah, thou spell! Avaunt!

CLEOPATRA
Why is my lord enraged against his love?

ANTONY
Vanish, or I shall give thee thy deserving
And blemish Caesar's triumph. Let him take thee
And hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians!
Follow his chariot, like the greatest spot
Of all thy sex; most monster-like be shown
For poor'st diminutives, for dolts, and let
Patient Octavia plow thy visage up
With her prepared nails.	[Cleopatra exits.]
'Tis well th' art gone,
If it be well to live. But better 'twere
Thou fell'st into my fury, for one death
Might have prevented many.--Eros, ho!--
The shirt of Nessus is upon me. Teach me,
Alcides, thou mine ancestor, thy rage.
Let me lodge Lichas on the horns o' th' moon,
And with those hands that grasped the heaviest
club
Subdue my worthiest self. The witch shall die.
To the young Roman boy she hath sold me, and I
fall
Under this plot. She dies for 't.--Eros, ho!
[He exits.]

Scene 13
========
[Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras, and Mardian.]


CLEOPATRA
Help me, my women! O, he's more mad
Than Telamon for his shield; the boar of Thessaly
Was never so embossed.

CHARMIAN  To th' monument!
There lock yourself and send him word you are
dead.
The soul and body rive not more in parting
Than greatness going off.

CLEOPATRA  To th' monument!--
Mardian, go tell him I have slain myself.
Say that the last I spoke was "Antony,"
And word it, prithee, piteously. Hence, Mardian,
And bring me how he takes my death.--To th'
monument!
[They exit.]

Scene 14
========
[Enter Antony and Eros.]


ANTONY
Eros, thou yet behold'st me?

EROS  Ay, noble lord.

ANTONY
Sometime we see a cloud that's dragonish,
A vapor sometime like a bear or lion,
A towered citadel, a pendent rock,
A forked mountain, or blue promontory
With trees upon 't that nod unto the world
And mock our eyes with air. Thou hast seen these
signs.
They are black vesper's pageants.

EROS  Ay, my lord.

ANTONY
That which is now a horse, even with a thought
The rack dislimns and makes it indistinct
As water is in water.

EROS  It does, my lord.

ANTONY
My good knave Eros, now thy captain is
Even such a body. Here I am Antony,
Yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave.
I made these wars for Egypt, and the Queen,
Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine--
Which whilst it was mine had annexed unto 't
A million more, now lost--she, Eros, has
Packed cards with Caesar and false-played my glory
Unto an enemy's triumph.
Nay, weep not, gentle Eros. There is left us
Ourselves to end ourselves.

[Enter Mardian.]

O, thy vile lady!
She has robbed me of my sword.

MARDIAN  No, Antony,
My mistress loved thee and her fortunes mingled
With thine entirely.

ANTONY  Hence, saucy eunuch! Peace!
She hath betrayed me and shall die the death.

MARDIAN
Death of one person can be paid but once,
And that she has discharged. What thou wouldst do
Is done unto thy hand. The last she spake
Was "Antony, most noble Antony."
Then in the midst a tearing groan did break
The name of Antony; it was divided
Between her heart and lips. She rendered life
Thy name so buried in her.

ANTONY  Dead, then?

MARDIAN  Dead.

ANTONY
Unarm, Eros. The long day's task is done,
And we must sleep.--That thou depart'st hence safe
Does pay thy labor richly. Go.	[Mardian exits.]
Off, pluck off!
[Eros begins to remove Antony's armor.]
The sevenfold shield of Ajax cannot keep
The battery from my heart. O, cleave, my sides!
Heart, once be stronger than thy continent;
Crack thy frail case. Apace, Eros, apace!
No more a soldier. Bruised pieces, go.
You have been nobly borne.--From me awhile.
[Eros exits.]
I will o'ertake thee, Cleopatra, and
Weep for my pardon. So it must be, for now
All length is torture. Since the torch is out,
Lie down and stray no farther. Now all labor
Mars what it does; yea, very force entangles
Itself with strength. Seal, then, and all is done.--
Eros!--I come, my queen.--Eros!--Stay for me.
Where souls do couch on flowers, we'll hand in hand,
And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze.
Dido and her Aeneas shall want troops,
And all the haunt be ours.--Come, Eros, Eros!

[Enter Eros.]


EROS
What would my lord?

ANTONY  Since Cleopatra died
I have lived in such dishonor that the gods
Detest my baseness. I, that with my sword
Quartered the world and o'er green Neptune's back
With ships made cities, condemn myself to lack
The courage of a woman--less noble mind
Than she which, by her death, our Caesar tells
"I am conqueror of myself." Thou art sworn, Eros,
That when the exigent should come, which now
Is come indeed, when I should see behind me
Th' inevitable prosecution of
Disgrace and horror, that on my command
Thou then wouldst kill me. Do 't. The time is come.
Thou strik'st not me; 'tis Caesar thou defeat'st.
Put color in thy cheek.

EROS  The gods withhold me!
Shall I do that which all the Parthian darts,
Though enemy, lost aim and could not?

ANTONY  Eros,
Wouldst thou be windowed in great Rome and see
Thy master thus with pleached arms, bending down
His corrigible neck, his face subdued
To penetrative shame, whilst the wheeled seat
Of fortunate Caesar, drawn before him, branded
His baseness that ensued?

EROS  I would not see 't.

ANTONY
Come, then, for with a wound I must be cured.
Draw that thy honest sword, which thou hast worn
Most useful for thy country.

EROS  O, sir, pardon me!

ANTONY
When I did make thee free, swor'st thou not then
To do this when I bade thee? Do it at once,
Or thy precedent services are all
But accidents unpurposed. Draw, and come.

EROS
Turn from me then that noble countenance
Wherein the worship of the whole world lies.

ANTONY  Lo thee!	[He turns away.]

EROS
My sword is drawn.

ANTONY  Then let it do at once
The thing why thou hast drawn it.

EROS  My dear master,
My captain, and my emperor, let me say,
Before I strike this bloody stroke, farewell.

ANTONY  'Tis said, man, and farewell.

EROS
Farewell, great chief. Shall I strike now?

ANTONY  Now, Eros.

EROS
Why, there, then.	[Stabs himself.]
Thus I do escape the sorrow
Of Antony's death.	[Dies.]

ANTONY  Thrice nobler than myself,
Thou teachest me, O valiant Eros, what
I should and thou couldst not. My queen and Eros
Have by their brave instruction got upon me
A nobleness in record. But I will be
A bridegroom in my death and run into 't
As to a lover's bed. Come then, and, Eros,
Thy master dies thy scholar. To do thus
I learned of thee. [He stabs himself.] How, not dead?
Not dead?
The guard, ho! O, dispatch me!

[Enter a company of the Guard, one of them named
Dercetus.]


FIRST GUARD  What's the noise?

ANTONY
I have done my work ill, friends. O, make an end
Of what I have begun!

SECOND GUARD  The star is fall'n.

FIRST GUARD
And time is at his period.

ALL  Alas, and woe!

ANTONY  Let him that loves me strike me dead.

FIRST GUARD  Not I.

SECOND GUARD  Nor I.

THIRD GUARD  Nor anyone.
[All but Antony and Dercetus exit.]

DERCETUS
Thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly.
[He takes Antony's sword.]
This sword but shown to Caesar with this tidings
Shall enter me with him.

[Enter Diomedes.]


DIOMEDES  Where's Antony?

DERCETUS  There, Diomed, there.

DIOMEDES  Lives he? Wilt thou not answer, man?
[Dercetus exits.]

ANTONY
Art thou there, Diomed? Draw thy sword, and give me
Sufficing strokes for death.

DIOMEDES  Most absolute lord,
My mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.

ANTONY
When did she send thee?

DIOMEDES  Now, my lord.

ANTONY  Where is she?

DIOMEDES
Locked in her monument. She had a prophesying
fear
Of what hath come to pass. For when she saw--
Which never shall be found--you did suspect
She had disposed with Caesar, and that your rage
Would not be purged, she sent you word she was
dead;
But fearing since how it might work, hath sent
Me to proclaim the truth, and I am come,
I dread, too late.

ANTONY
Too late, good Diomed. Call my guard, I prithee.

DIOMEDES
What ho! The Emperor's guard! The guard, what ho!
Come, your lord calls.

[Enter four or five of the Guard of Antony.]


ANTONY
Bear me, good friends, where Cleopatra bides.
'Tis the last service that I shall command you.

FIRST GUARD
Woe, woe are we, sir, you may not live to wear
All your true followers out.

ALL  Most heavy day!

ANTONY
Nay, good my fellows, do not please sharp fate
To grace it with your sorrows. Bid that welcome
Which comes to punish us, and we punish it,
Seeming to bear it lightly. Take me up.
I have led you oft; carry me now, good friends,
And have my thanks for all.
[They exit bearing Antony and the body of Eros.]

Scene 15
========
[Enter Cleopatra and her maids aloft, with
Charmian and Iras.]


CLEOPATRA
O Charmian, I will never go from hence.

CHARMIAN
Be comforted, dear madam.

CLEOPATRA  No, I will not.
All strange and terrible events are welcome,
But comforts we despise. Our size of sorrow,
Proportioned to our cause, must be as great
As that which makes it.

[Enter Diomedes below.]

How now? Is he dead?

DIOMEDES
His death's upon him, but not dead.
Look out o' th' other side your monument.
His guard have brought him thither.

[Enter Antony below, and the Guard bearing him.]


CLEOPATRA  O sun,
Burn the great sphere thou mov'st in. Darkling stand
The varying shore o' th' world! O Antony, Antony,
Antony! Help, Charmian! Help, Iras, help!
Help, friends below! Let's draw him hither.

ANTONY  Peace!
Not Caesar's valor hath o'erthrown Antony,
But Antony's hath triumphed on itself.

CLEOPATRA
So it should be that none but Antony
Should conquer Antony, but woe 'tis so!

ANTONY
I am dying, Egypt, dying. Only
I here importune death awhile until
Of many thousand kisses the poor last
I lay upon thy lips.

CLEOPATRA  I dare not, dear,
Dear my lord, pardon, I dare not,
Lest I be taken. Not th' imperious show
Of the full-fortuned Caesar ever shall
Be brooched with me; if knife, drugs, serpents have
Edge, sting, or operation, I am safe.
Your wife Octavia, with her modest eyes
And still conclusion, shall acquire no honor
Demuring upon me. But come, come, Antony.--
Help me, my women!--We must draw thee up.--
Assist, good friends.	[They begin lifting him.]

ANTONY  O, quick, or I am gone.

CLEOPATRA
Here's sport indeed. How heavy weighs my lord!
Our strength is all gone into heaviness;
That makes the weight. Had I great Juno's power,
The strong-winged Mercury should fetch thee up
And set thee by Jove's side. Yet come a little.
Wishers were ever fools. O, come, come, come!
[They heave Antony aloft to Cleopatra.]
And welcome, welcome! Die when thou hast lived;
Quicken with kissing. Had my lips that power,
Thus would I wear them out.	[She kisses him.]

ALL  A heavy sight!

ANTONY  I am dying, Egypt, dying.
Give me some wine, and let me speak a little.

CLEOPATRA
No, let me speak, and let me rail so high
That the false huswife Fortune break her wheel,
Provoked by my offense.

ANTONY  One word, sweet queen:
Of Caesar seek your honor with your safety--O!

CLEOPATRA
They do not go together.

ANTONY  Gentle, hear me.
None about Caesar trust but Proculeius.

CLEOPATRA
My resolution and my hands I'll trust,
None about Caesar.

ANTONY
The miserable change now at my end
Lament nor sorrow at, but please your thoughts
In feeding them with those my former fortunes
Wherein I lived the greatest prince o' th' world,
The noblest, and do now not basely die,
Not cowardly put off my helmet to
My countryman--a Roman by a Roman
Valiantly vanquished. Now my spirit is going;
I can no more.

CLEOPATRA  Noblest of men, woo't die?
Hast thou no care of me? Shall I abide
In this dull world, which in thy absence is
No better than a sty? O see, my women,
The crown o' th' Earth doth melt.--My lord!
[Antony dies.]
O, withered is the garland of the war;
The soldier's pole is fall'n; young boys and girls
Are level now with men. The odds is gone,
And there is nothing left remarkable
Beneath the visiting moon.

CHARMIAN  O, quietness, lady!
[Cleopatra swoons.]

IRAS  She's dead, too, our sovereign.

CHARMIAN  Lady!

IRAS  Madam!

CHARMIAN  O madam, madam, madam!

IRAS  Royal Egypt! Empress!	[Cleopatra stirs.]

CHARMIAN  Peace, peace, Iras!

CLEOPATRA
No more but e'en a woman, and commanded
By such poor passion as the maid that milks
And does the meanest chares. It were for me
To throw my scepter at the injurious gods,
To tell them that this world did equal theirs
Till they had stolen our jewel. All's but naught.
Patience is sottish, and impatience does
Become a dog that's mad. Then is it sin
To rush into the secret house of death
Ere death dare come to us? How do you, women?
What, what, good cheer! Why, how now, Charmian?
My noble girls! Ah, women, women! Look,
Our lamp is spent; it's out. Good sirs, take heart.
We'll bury him; and then, what's brave, what's
noble,
Let's do 't after the high Roman fashion
And make death proud to take us. Come, away.
This case of that huge spirit now is cold.
Ah women, women! Come, we have no friend
But resolution and the briefest end.
[They exit, bearing off Antony's body.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Caesar with Agrippa, Dolabella, Maecenas,
Gallus, and Proculeius, his council of war.]


CAESAR, [aside to Dolabella]
Go to him, Dolabella, bid him yield.
Being so frustrate, tell him, he mocks
The pauses that he makes.

DOLABELLA  Caesar, I shall.
[Dolabella exits.]

[Enter Dercetus with the sword of Antony.]


CAESAR
Wherefore is that? And what art thou that dar'st
Appear thus to us?

DERCETUS  I am called Dercetus.
Mark Antony I served, who best was worthy
Best to be served. Whilst he stood up and spoke,
He was my master, and I wore my life
To spend upon his haters. If thou please
To take me to thee, as I was to him
I'll be to Caesar; if thou pleasest not,
I yield thee up my life.

CAESAR  What is 't thou say'st?

DERCETUS
I say, O Caesar, Antony is dead.

CAESAR
The breaking of so great a thing should make
A greater crack. The round world
Should have shook lions into civil streets
And citizens to their dens. The death of Antony
Is not a single doom; in the name lay
A moiety of the world.

DERCETUS  He is dead, Caesar,
Not by a public minister of justice,
Nor by a hired knife, but that self hand
Which writ his honor in the acts it did
Hath, with the courage which the heart did lend it,
Splitted the heart. This is his sword.
I robbed his wound of it. Behold it stained
With his most noble blood.

CAESAR  Look you sad, friends?
The gods rebuke me, but it is tidings
To wash the eyes of kings.

AGRIPPA  And strange it is
That nature must compel us to lament
Our most persisted deeds.

MAECENAS  His taints and honors
Waged equal with him.

AGRIPPA  A rarer spirit never
Did steer humanity, but you gods will give us
Some faults to make us men. Caesar is touched.

MAECENAS
When such a spacious mirror's set before him,
He needs must see himself.

CAESAR  O Antony,
I have followed thee to this, but we do lance
Diseases in our bodies. I must perforce
Have shown to thee such a declining day
Or look on thine. We could not stall together
In the whole world. But yet let me lament
With tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts
That thou my brother, my competitor
In top of all design, my mate in empire,
Friend and companion in the front of war,
The arm of mine own body, and the heart
Where mine his thoughts did kindle--that our stars
Unreconciliable should divide
Our equalness to this. Hear me, good friends--

[Enter an Egyptian.]

But I will tell you at some meeter season.
The business of this man looks out of him.
We'll hear him what he says.--Whence are you?

EGYPTIAN
A poor Egyptian yet, the Queen my mistress,
Confined in all she has, her monument,
Of thy intents desires instruction,
That she preparedly may frame herself
To th' way she's forced to.

CAESAR  Bid her have good heart.
She soon shall know of us, by some of ours,
How honorable and how kindly we
Determine for her. For Caesar cannot live
To be ungentle.

EGYPTIAN  So the gods preserve thee.	[He exits.]

CAESAR
Come hither, Proculeius. Go and say
We purpose her no shame. Give her what comforts
The quality of her passion shall require,
Lest, in her greatness, by some mortal stroke
She do defeat us, for her life in Rome
Would be eternal in our triumph. Go,
And with your speediest bring us what she says
And how you find of her.

PROCULEIUS  Caesar, I shall.
[Proculeius exits.]

CAESAR
Gallus, go you along.	[Gallus exits.]
Where's Dolabella,
To second Proculeius?

ALL  Dolabella!

CAESAR
Let him alone, for I remember now
How he's employed. He shall in time be ready.
Go with me to my tent, where you shall see
How hardly I was drawn into this war,
How calm and gentle I proceeded still
In all my writings. Go with me and see
What I can show in this.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, and Iras.]


CLEOPATRA
My desolation does begin to make
A better life. 'Tis paltry to be Caesar;
Not being Fortune, he's but Fortune's knave,
A minister of her will. And it is great
To do that thing that ends all other deeds,
Which shackles accidents and bolts up change,
Which sleeps and never palates more the dung,
The beggar's nurse, and Caesar's.

[Enter Proculeius.]


PROCULEIUS
Caesar sends greeting to the Queen of Egypt,
And bids thee study on what fair demands
Thou mean'st to have him grant thee.

CLEOPATRA  What's thy name?

PROCULEIUS
My name is Proculeius.

CLEOPATRA  Antony
Did tell me of you, bade me trust you, but
I do not greatly care to be deceived
That have no use for trusting. If your master
Would have a queen his beggar, you must tell him
That majesty, to keep decorum, must
No less beg than a kingdom. If he please
To give me conquered Egypt for my son,
He gives me so much of mine own as I
Will kneel to him with thanks.

PROCULEIUS  Be of good cheer.
You're fall'n into a princely hand; fear nothing.
Make your full reference freely to my lord,
Who is so full of grace that it flows over
On all that need. Let me report to him
Your sweet dependency, and you shall find
A conqueror that will pray in aid for kindness
Where he for grace is kneeled to.

CLEOPATRA  Pray you tell him
I am his fortune's vassal and I send him
The greatness he has got. I hourly learn
A doctrine of obedience, and would gladly
Look him i' th' face.

PROCULEIUS  This I'll report, dear lady.
Have comfort, for I know your plight is pitied
Of him that caused it.

[Gallus and Soldiers enter and seize Cleopatra.]


GALLUS
You see how easily she may be surprised.
Guard her till Caesar come.

IRAS  Royal queen!

CHARMIAN
O, Cleopatra, thou art taken, queen!

CLEOPATRA, [drawing a dagger]
Quick, quick, good hands!

PROCULEIUS, [seizing the dagger]  Hold, worthy lady, hold!
Do not yourself such wrong, who are in this
Relieved, but not betrayed.

CLEOPATRA  What, of death, too,
That rids our dogs of languish?

PROCULEIUS  Cleopatra,
Do not abuse my master's bounty by
Th' undoing of yourself. Let the world see
His nobleness well acted, which your death
Will never let come forth.

CLEOPATRA  Where art thou, Death?
Come hither, come! Come, come, and take a queen
Worth many babes and beggars.

PROCULEIUS  O, temperance, lady!

CLEOPATRA
Sir, I will eat no meat; I'll not drink, sir.
If idle talk will once be necessary--
I'll not sleep neither. This mortal house I'll ruin,
Do Caesar what he can. Know, sir, that I
Will not wait pinioned at your master's court,
Nor once be chastised with the sober eye
Of dull Octavia. Shall they hoist me up
And show me to the shouting varletry
Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt
Be gentle grave unto me; rather on Nilus' mud
Lay me stark naked, and let the waterflies
Blow me into abhorring; rather make
My country's high pyramides my gibbet
And hang me up in chains!

PROCULEIUS  You do extend
These thoughts of horror further than you shall
Find cause in Caesar.

[Enter Dolabella.]


DOLABELLA  Proculeius,
What thou hast done thy master Caesar knows,
And he hath sent for thee. For the Queen,
I'll take her to my guard.

PROCULEIUS  So, Dolabella,
It shall content me best. Be gentle to her.
[To Cleopatra.] To Caesar I will speak what you
shall please,
If you'll employ me to him.

CLEOPATRA  Say I would die.
[Proculeius, Gallus, and Soldiers exit.]

DOLABELLA
Most noble empress, you have heard of me.

CLEOPATRA
I cannot tell.

DOLABELLA  Assuredly you know me.

CLEOPATRA
No matter, sir, what I have heard or known.
You laugh when boys or women tell their dreams;
Is 't not your trick?

DOLABELLA  I understand not, madam.

CLEOPATRA
I dreamt there was an emperor Antony.
O, such another sleep, that I might see
But such another man.

DOLABELLA  If it might please you--

CLEOPATRA
His face was as the heavens, and therein stuck
A sun and moon, which kept their course and
lighted
The little O, the Earth.

DOLABELLA  Most sovereign creature--

CLEOPATRA
His legs bestrid the ocean, his reared arm
Crested the world. His voice was propertied
As all the tuned spheres, and that to friends;
But when he meant to quail and shake the orb,
He was as rattling thunder. For his bounty,
There was no winter in 't; an autumn 'twas
That grew the more by reaping. His delights
Were dolphin-like; they showed his back above
The element they lived in. In his livery
Walked crowns and crownets; realms and islands
were
As plates dropped from his pocket.

DOLABELLA  Cleopatra--

CLEOPATRA
Think you there was, or might be, such a man
As this I dreamt of?

DOLABELLA  Gentle madam, no.

CLEOPATRA
You lie up to the hearing of the gods!
But if there be nor ever were one such,
It's past the size of dreaming. Nature wants stuff
To vie strange forms with fancy, yet t' imagine
An Antony were nature's piece 'gainst fancy,
Condemning shadows quite.

DOLABELLA  Hear me, good madam.
Your loss is as yourself, great; and you bear it
As answering to the weight. Would I might never
O'ertake pursued success but I do feel,
By the rebound of yours, a grief that smites
My very heart at root.

CLEOPATRA  I thank you, sir.
Know you what Caesar means to do with me?

DOLABELLA
I am loath to tell you what I would you knew.

CLEOPATRA
Nay, pray you, sir.

DOLABELLA  Though he be honorable--

CLEOPATRA  He'll lead me, then, in triumph.

DOLABELLA  Madam, he will. I know 't.

[Flourish. Enter Caesar, Proculeius, Gallus, Maecenas,
and others of his train.]


ALL  Make way there! Caesar!

CAESAR  Which is the Queen of Egypt?

DOLABELLA  It is the Emperor, madam.
[Cleopatra kneels.]

CAESAR  Arise. You shall not kneel.
I pray you, rise. Rise, Egypt.

CLEOPATRA  Sir, the gods
Will have it thus. My master and my lord
I must obey.	[She stands.]

CAESAR  Take to you no hard thoughts.
The record of what injuries you did us,
Though written in our flesh, we shall remember
As things but done by chance.

CLEOPATRA  Sole sir o' th' world,
I cannot project mine own cause so well
To make it clear, but do confess I have
Been laden with like frailties which before
Have often shamed our sex.

CAESAR  Cleopatra, know
We will extenuate rather than enforce.
If you apply yourself to our intents,
Which towards you are most gentle, you shall find
A benefit in this change; but if you seek
To lay on me a cruelty by taking
Antony's course, you shall bereave yourself
Of my good purposes, and put your children
To that destruction which I'll guard them from
If thereon you rely. I'll take my leave.

CLEOPATRA
And may through all the world. 'Tis yours, and we,
Your scutcheons and your signs of conquest, shall
Hang in what place you please. Here, my good lord.
[She holds out a paper.]

CAESAR
You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra.

CLEOPATRA
This is the brief of money, plate, and jewels
I am possessed of. 'Tis exactly valued,
Not petty things admitted.--Where's Seleucus?

[Enter Seleucus.]


SELEUCUS  Here, madam.

CLEOPATRA
This is my treasurer. Let him speak, my lord,
Upon his peril, that I have reserved
To myself nothing.--Speak the truth, Seleucus.

SELEUCUS
Madam, I had rather seel my lips
Than to my peril speak that which is not.

CLEOPATRA  What have I kept back?

SELEUCUS
Enough to purchase what you have made known.

CAESAR
Nay, blush not, Cleopatra. I approve
Your wisdom in the deed.

CLEOPATRA  See, Caesar, O, behold
How pomp is followed! Mine will now be yours,
And should we shift estates, yours would be mine.
The ingratitude of this Seleucus does
Even make me wild.--O slave, of no more trust
Than love that's hired! What, goest thou back? Thou
shalt
Go back, I warrant thee! But I'll catch thine eyes
Though they had wings. Slave, soulless villain, dog!
O rarely base!

CAESAR  Good queen, let us entreat you--

CLEOPATRA
O Caesar, what a wounding shame is this,
That thou vouchsafing here to visit me,
Doing the honor of thy lordliness
To one so meek, that mine own servant should
Parcel the sum of my disgraces by
Addition of his envy! Say, good Caesar,
That I some lady trifles have reserved,
Immoment toys, things of such dignity
As we greet modern friends withal, and say
Some nobler token I have kept apart
For Livia and Octavia, to induce
Their mediation, must I be unfolded
With one that I have bred? The gods! It smites me
Beneath the fall I have. [To Seleucus.] Prithee, go
hence,
Or I shall show the cinders of my spirits
Through th' ashes of my chance. Wert thou a man,
Thou wouldst have mercy on me.

CAESAR  Forbear, Seleucus.
[Seleucus exits.]

CLEOPATRA
Be it known that we, the greatest, are misthought
For things that others do; and when we fall,
We answer others' merits in our name--
Are therefore to be pitied.

CAESAR  Cleopatra,
Not what you have reserved nor what acknowledged
Put we i' th' roll of conquest. Still be 't yours!
Bestow it at your pleasure, and believe
Caesar's no merchant to make prize with you
Of things that merchants sold. Therefore be
cheered.
Make not your thoughts your prisons. No, dear
queen,
For we intend so to dispose you as
Yourself shall give us counsel. Feed and sleep.
Our care and pity is so much upon you
That we remain your friend. And so adieu.

CLEOPATRA
My master and my lord!

CAESAR  Not so. Adieu.
[Flourish. Caesar and his train exit.]

CLEOPATRA
He words me, girls, he words me, that I should not
Be noble to myself. But hark thee, Charmian.
[She whispers to Charmian.]

IRAS
Finish, good lady. The bright day is done,
And we are for the dark.

CLEOPATRA, [to Charmian]  Hie thee again.
I have spoke already, and it is provided.
Go put it to the haste.

CHARMIAN  Madam, I will.

[Enter Dolabella.]


DOLABELLA
Where's the Queen?

CHARMIAN  Behold, sir.	[She exits.]

CLEOPATRA  Dolabella.

DOLABELLA
Madam, as thereto sworn by your command,
Which my love makes religion to obey,
I tell you this: Caesar through Syria
Intends his journey, and within three days
You with your children will he send before.
Make your best use of this. I have performed
Your pleasure and my promise.

CLEOPATRA  Dolabella,
I shall remain your debtor.

DOLABELLA  I your servant.
Adieu, good queen. I must attend on Caesar.

CLEOPATRA
Farewell, and thanks.	[He exits.]
Now, Iras, what think'st thou?
Thou an Egyptian puppet shall be shown
In Rome as well as I. Mechanic slaves
With greasy aprons, rules, and hammers shall
Uplift us to the view. In their thick breaths,
Rank of gross diet, shall we be enclouded
And forced to drink their vapor.

IRAS  The gods forbid!

CLEOPATRA
Nay, 'tis most certain, Iras. Saucy lictors
Will catch at us like strumpets, and scald rhymers
Ballad us out o' tune. The quick comedians
Extemporally will stage us and present
Our Alexandrian revels. Antony
Shall be brought drunken forth, and I shall see
Some squeaking Cleopatra boy my greatness
I' th' posture of a whore.

IRAS  O the good gods!

CLEOPATRA  Nay, that's certain.

IRAS
I'll never see 't! For I am sure mine nails
Are stronger than mine eyes.

CLEOPATRA  Why, that's the way
To fool their preparation and to conquer
Their most absurd intents.

[Enter Charmian.]

Now, Charmian!
Show me, my women, like a queen. Go fetch
My best attires. I am again for Cydnus
To meet Mark Antony. Sirrah Iras, go.--
Now, noble Charmian, we'll dispatch indeed,
And when thou hast done this chare, I'll give thee
leave
To play till Doomsday.--Bring our crown and all.
[Iras exits. A noise within.]
Wherefore's this noise?

[Enter a Guardsman.]


GUARDSMAN  Here is a rural fellow
That will not be denied your Highness' presence.
He brings you figs.

CLEOPATRA
Let him come in.	[Guardsman exits.]
What poor an instrument
May do a noble deed! He brings me liberty.
My resolution's placed, and I have nothing
Of woman in me. Now from head to foot
I am marble-constant. Now the fleeting moon
No planet is of mine.

[Enter Guardsman and Countryman, with a basket.]


GUARDSMAN  This is the man.

CLEOPATRA  Avoid, and leave him.	[Guardsman exits.]
Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there
That kills and pains not?

COUNTRYMAN  Truly I have him, but I would not be
the party that should desire you to touch him, for
his biting is immortal. Those that do die of it do
seldom or never recover.

CLEOPATRA  Remember'st thou any that have died on 't?

COUNTRYMAN  Very many, men and women too. I
heard of one of them no longer than yesterday--a
very honest woman, but something given to lie, as a
woman should not do but in the way of honesty--
how she died of the biting of it, what pain she felt.
Truly, she makes a very good report o' th' worm.
But he that will believe all that they say shall never
be saved by half that they do. But this is most
falliable, the worm's an odd worm.

CLEOPATRA  Get thee hence. Farewell.

COUNTRYMAN  I wish you all joy of the worm.
[He sets down the basket.]

CLEOPATRA  Farewell.

COUNTRYMAN  You must think this, look you, that the
worm will do his kind.

CLEOPATRA  Ay, ay, farewell.

COUNTRYMAN  Look you, the worm is not to be trusted
but in the keeping of wise people, for indeed there
is no goodness in the worm.

CLEOPATRA  Take thou no care; it shall be heeded.

COUNTRYMAN  Very good. Give it nothing, I pray you,
for it is not worth the feeding.

CLEOPATRA  Will it eat me?

COUNTRYMAN  You must not think I am so simple but
I know the devil himself will not eat a woman. I
know that a woman is a dish for the gods if the devil
dress her not. But truly these same whoreson devils
do the gods great harm in their women, for in every
ten that they make, the devils mar five.

CLEOPATRA  Well, get thee gone. Farewell.

COUNTRYMAN  Yes, forsooth. I wish you joy o' th'
worm.	[He exits.]

[Enter Iras bearing Cleopatra's royal regalia.]


CLEOPATRA
Give me my robe. Put on my crown. I have
Immortal longings in me. Now no more
The juice of Egypt's grape shall moist this lip.
[Charmian and Iras begin to dress her.]
Yare, yare, good Iras, quick. Methinks I hear
Antony call. I see him rouse himself
To praise my noble act. I hear him mock
The luck of Caesar, which the gods give men
To excuse their after wrath.--Husband, I come!
Now to that name my courage prove my title.
I am fire and air; my other elements
I give to baser life.--So, have you done?
Come then, and take the last warmth of my lips.
Farewell, kind Charmian.--Iras, long farewell.
[She kisses them. Iras falls and dies.]
Have I the aspic in my lips? Dost fall?
If thou and nature can so gently part,
The stroke of death is as a lover's pinch,
Which hurts and is desired. Dost thou lie still?
If thus thou vanishest, thou tell'st the world
It is not worth leave-taking.

CHARMIAN
Dissolve, thick cloud, and rain, that I may say
The gods themselves do weep!

CLEOPATRA  This proves me base.
If she first meet the curled Antony,
He'll make demand of her, and spend that kiss
Which is my heaven to have.--Come, thou mortal
wretch,	[She places an asp on her breast.]
With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate
Of life at once untie. Poor venomous fool,
Be angry and dispatch. O, couldst thou speak,
That I might hear thee call great Caesar ass
Unpolicied!

CHARMIAN  O eastern star!

CLEOPATRA  Peace, peace!
Dost thou not see my baby at my breast,
That sucks the nurse asleep?

CHARMIAN  O, break! O, break!

CLEOPATRA
As sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle--
O Antony!--Nay, I will take thee too.
[She places an asp on her arm.]
What should I stay--	[Dies.]

CHARMIAN  In this wild world? So, fare thee well.
Now boast thee, Death, in thy possession lies
A lass unparalleled. Downy windows, close,
[She closes Cleopatra's eyes.]
And golden Phoebus, never be beheld
Of eyes again so royal. Your crown's awry.
I'll mend it, and then play--

[Enter the Guard rustling in.]


FIRST GUARD
Where's the Queen?

CHARMIAN  Speak softly. Wake her not.

FIRST GUARD
Caesar hath sent--

CHARMIAN  Too slow a messenger.
[She takes out an asp.]
O, come apace, dispatch! I partly feel thee.

FIRST GUARD
Approach, ho! All's not well. Caesar's beguiled.

SECOND GUARD
There's Dolabella sent from Caesar. Call him.
[A Guardsman exits.]

FIRST GUARD
What work is here, Charmian? Is this well done?

CHARMIAN
It is well done, and fitting for a princess
Descended of so many royal kings.
Ah, soldier!	[Charmian dies.]

[Enter Dolabella.]


DOLABELLA
How goes it here?

SECOND GUARD  All dead.

DOLABELLA  Caesar, thy thoughts
Touch their effects in this. Thyself art coming
To see performed the dreaded act which thou
So sought'st to hinder.

[Enter Caesar and all his train, marching.]


ALL  A way there, a way for Caesar!

DOLABELLA
O sir, you are too sure an augurer:
That you did fear is done.

CAESAR  Bravest at the last,
She leveled at our purposes and, being royal,
Took her own way. The manner of their deaths?
I do not see them bleed.

DOLABELLA  Who was last with them?

FIRST GUARD
A simple countryman that brought her figs.
This was his basket.

CAESAR  Poisoned, then.

FIRST GUARD  O Caesar,
This Charmian lived but now; she stood and spake.
I found her trimming up the diadem
On her dead mistress; tremblingly she stood,
And on the sudden dropped.

CAESAR  O, noble weakness!
If they had swallowed poison, 'twould appear
By external swelling; but she looks like sleep,
As she would catch another Antony
In her strong toil of grace.

DOLABELLA  Here on her breast
There is a vent of blood, and something blown.
The like is on her arm.

FIRST GUARD
This is an aspic's trail, and these fig leaves
Have slime upon them, such as th' aspic leaves
Upon the caves of Nile.

CAESAR  Most probable
That so she died, for her physician tells me
She hath pursued conclusions infinite
Of easy ways to die. Take up her bed,
And bear her women from the monument.
She shall be buried by her Antony.
No grave upon the earth shall clip in it
A pair so famous. High events as these
Strike those that make them; and their story is
No less in pity than his glory which
Brought them to be lamented. Our army shall
In solemn show attend this funeral,
And then to Rome. Come, Dolabella, see
High order in this great solemnity.
[They all exit, the Guards
bearing the dead bodies.]
As You Like It
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/as-you-like-it/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
ORLANDO, youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys
OLIVER, his elder brother
SECOND BROTHER, brother to Orlando and Oliver, named Jaques
ADAM, servant to Oliver and friend to Orlando
DENNIS, servant to Oliver
ROSALIND, daughter to Duke Senior
CELIA, Rosalind's cousin, daughter to Duke Frederick
TOUCHSTONE, a court Fool
DUKE FREDERICK, the usurping duke
CHARLES, wrestler at Duke Frederick's court
LE BEAU, a courtier at Duke Frederick's court
Attending Duke Frederick:
  FIRST LORD
  SECOND LORD
DUKE SENIOR, the exiled duke, brother to Duke Frederick
Lords attending Duke Senior in exile:
  JAQUES
  AMIENS
  FIRST LORD
  SECOND LORD
Attending Duke Senior in exile:
  FIRST PAGE
  SECOND PAGE
CORIN, a shepherd
SILVIUS, a young shepherd in love
PHOEBE, a disdainful shepherdess
AUDREY, a goat-keeper
WILLIAM, a country youth in love with Audrey
SIR OLIVER MARTEXT, a parish priest
HYMEN, god of marriage
Lords, Attendants, Musicians


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Orlando and Adam.]


ORLANDO  As I remember, Adam, it was upon this
fashion bequeathed me by will but poor a thousand
crowns, and, as thou sayst, charged my brother on
his blessing to breed me well. And there begins my
sadness. My brother Jaques he keeps at school, and
report speaks goldenly of his profit. For my part, he
keeps me rustically at home, or, to speak more
properly, stays me here at home unkept; for call you
that "keeping," for a gentleman of my birth, that
differs not from the stalling of an ox? His horses are
bred better, for, besides that they are fair with their
feeding, they are taught their manage and, to that
end, riders dearly hired. But I, his brother, gain
nothing under him but growth, for the which his
animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him
as I. Besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives
me, the something that nature gave me his countenance
seems to take from me. He lets me feed with
his hinds, bars me the place of a brother, and, as
much as in him lies, mines my gentility with my
education. This is it, Adam, that grieves me, and the
spirit of my father, which I think is within me,
begins to mutiny against this servitude. I will no
longer endure it, though yet I know no wise remedy
how to avoid it.

[Enter Oliver.]


ADAM  Yonder comes my master, your brother.

ORLANDO  Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he
will shake me up.	[Adam steps aside.]

OLIVER  Now, sir, what make you here?

ORLANDO  Nothing. I am not taught to make anything.

OLIVER  What mar you then, sir?

ORLANDO  Marry, sir, I am helping you to mar that
which God made, a poor unworthy brother of
yours, with idleness.

OLIVER  Marry, sir, be better employed, and be naught
awhile.

ORLANDO  Shall I keep your hogs and eat husks with
them? What prodigal portion have I spent that I
should come to such penury?

OLIVER  Know you where you are, sir?

ORLANDO  O, sir, very well: here in your orchard.

OLIVER  Know you before whom, sir?

ORLANDO  Ay, better than him I am before knows me. I
know you are my eldest brother, and in the gentle
condition of blood you should so know me. The
courtesy of nations allows you my better in that you
are the first-born, but the same tradition takes not
away my blood, were there twenty brothers betwixt
us. I have as much of my father in me as you, albeit I
confess your coming before me is nearer to his
reverence.

OLIVER, [threatening Orlando]  What, boy!

ORLANDO, [holding off Oliver by the throat]  Come,
come, elder brother, you are too young in this.

OLIVER  Wilt thou lay hands on me, villain?

ORLANDO  I am no villain. I am the youngest son of Sir
Rowland de Boys. He was my father, and he is
thrice a villain that says such a father begot villains.
Wert thou not my brother, I would not take this
hand from thy throat till this other had pulled out
thy tongue for saying so. Thou hast railed on thyself.

ADAM, [coming forward]  Sweet masters, be patient. For
your father's remembrance, be at accord.

OLIVER, [to Orlando]  Let me go, I say.

ORLANDO  I will not till I please. You shall hear me. My
father charged you in his will to give me good
education. You have trained me like a peasant,
obscuring and hiding from me all gentlemanlike
qualities. The spirit of my father grows strong in
me, and I will no longer endure it. Therefore allow
me such exercises as may become a gentleman, or
give me the poor allottery my father left me by
testament. With that I will go buy my fortunes.
[Orlando releases Oliver.]

OLIVER  And what wilt thou do--beg when that is
spent? Well, sir, get you in. I will not long be
troubled with you. You shall have some part of your
will. I pray you leave me.

ORLANDO  I will no further offend you than becomes
me for my good.

OLIVER, [to Adam]  Get you with him, you old dog.

ADAM  Is "old dog" my reward? Most true, I have lost
my teeth in your service. God be with my old
master. He would not have spoke such a word.
[Orlando and Adam exit.]

OLIVER  Is it even so? Begin you to grow upon me? I
will physic your rankness, and yet give no thousand
crowns neither.--Holla, Dennis!

[Enter Dennis.]


DENNIS  Calls your Worship?

OLIVER  Was not Charles, the Duke's wrestler, here to
speak with me?

DENNIS  So please you, he is here at the door and
importunes access to you.

OLIVER  Call him in. [Dennis exits.] 'Twill be a good
way, and tomorrow the wrestling is.

[Enter Charles.]


CHARLES  Good morrow to your Worship.

OLIVER  Good Monsieur Charles, what's the new news
at the new court?

CHARLES  There's no news at the court, sir, but the old
news. That is, the old duke is banished by his
younger brother the new duke, and three or four
loving lords have put themselves into voluntary
exile with him, whose lands and revenues enrich
the new duke. Therefore he gives them good leave
to wander.

OLIVER  Can you tell if Rosalind, the Duke's daughter,
be banished with her father?

CHARLES  O, no, for the Duke's daughter her cousin so
loves her, being ever from their cradles bred together,
that she would have followed her exile or have
died to stay behind her. She is at the court and no
less beloved of her uncle than his own daughter,
and never two ladies loved as they do.

OLIVER  Where will the old duke live?

CHARLES  They say he is already in the Forest of Arden,
and a many merry men with him; and there they
live like the old Robin Hood of England. They say
many young gentlemen flock to him every day and
fleet the time carelessly, as they did in the golden
world.

OLIVER  What, you wrestle tomorrow before the new
duke?

CHARLES  Marry, do I, sir, and I came to acquaint you
with a matter. I am given, sir, secretly to understand
that your younger brother Orlando hath a
disposition to come in disguised against me to try a
fall. Tomorrow, sir, I wrestle for my credit, and he
that escapes me without some broken limb shall
acquit him well. Your brother is but young and
tender, and for your love I would be loath to foil
him, as I must for my own honor if he come in.
Therefore, out of my love to you, I came hither to
acquaint you withal, that either you might stay him
from his intendment, or brook such disgrace well
as he shall run into, in that it is a thing of his own
search and altogether against my will.

OLIVER  Charles, I thank thee for thy love to me, which
thou shalt find I will most kindly requite. I had
myself notice of my brother's purpose herein, and
have by underhand means labored to dissuade him
from it; but he is resolute. I'll tell thee, Charles, it is
the stubbornest young fellow of France, full of
ambition, an envious emulator of every man's good
parts, a secret and villainous contriver against me
his natural brother. Therefore use thy discretion. I
had as lief thou didst break his neck as his finger.
And thou wert best look to 't, for if thou dost him
any slight disgrace, or if he do not mightily grace
himself on thee, he will practice against thee by
poison, entrap thee by some treacherous device,
and never leave thee till he hath ta'en thy life by
some indirect means or other. For I assure thee--
and almost with tears I speak it--there is not one so
young and so villainous this day living. I speak but
brotherly of him, but should I anatomize him to
thee as he is, I must blush and weep, and thou must
look pale and wonder.

CHARLES  I am heartily glad I came hither to you. If he
come tomorrow, I'll give him his payment. If ever
he go alone again, I'll never wrestle for prize more.
And so God keep your Worship.

OLIVER  Farewell, good Charles.	[Charles exits.]
Now will I stir this gamester. I hope I shall see an
end of him, for my soul--yet I know not why--
hates nothing more than he. Yet he's gentle, never
schooled and yet learned, full of noble device, of all
sorts enchantingly beloved, and indeed so much in
the heart of the world, and especially of my own
people, who best know him, that I am altogether
misprized. But it shall not be so long; this wrestler
shall clear all. Nothing remains but that I kindle the
boy thither, which now I'll go about.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Rosalind and Celia.]


CELIA  I pray thee, Rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.

ROSALIND  Dear Celia, I show more mirth than I am
mistress of, and would you yet I were merrier?
Unless you could teach me to forget a banished
father, you must not learn me how to remember
any extraordinary pleasure.

CELIA  Herein I see thou lov'st me not with the full
weight that I love thee. If my uncle, thy banished
father, had banished thy uncle, the Duke my father,
so thou hadst been still with me, I could have taught
my love to take thy father for mine. So wouldst thou,
if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously
tempered as mine is to thee.

ROSALIND  Well, I will forget the condition of my estate
to rejoice in yours.

CELIA  You know my father hath no child but I, nor
none is like to have; and truly, when he dies, thou
shalt be his heir, for what he hath taken away from
thy father perforce, I will render thee again in
affection. By mine honor I will, and when I break
that oath, let me turn monster. Therefore, my sweet
Rose, my dear Rose, be merry.

ROSALIND  From henceforth I will, coz, and devise
sports. Let me see--what think you of falling in
love?

CELIA  Marry, I prithee do, to make sport withal; but
love no man in good earnest, nor no further in
sport neither than with safety of a pure blush thou
mayst in honor come off again.

ROSALIND  What shall be our sport, then?

CELIA  Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune
from her wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be
bestowed equally.

ROSALIND  I would we could do so, for her benefits are
mightily misplaced, and the bountiful blind woman
doth most mistake in her gifts to women.

CELIA  'Tis true, for those that she makes fair she scarce
makes honest, and those that she makes honest she
makes very ill-favoredly.

ROSALIND  Nay, now thou goest from Fortune's office to
Nature's. Fortune reigns in gifts of the world, not in
the lineaments of nature.

CELIA  No? When Nature hath made a fair creature,
may she not by fortune fall into the fire?

[Enter Touchstone.]

Though Nature hath given us wit to flout at Fortune,
hath not Fortune sent in this fool to cut off the
argument?

ROSALIND  Indeed, there is Fortune too hard for Nature,
when Fortune makes Nature's natural the
cutter-off of Nature's wit.

CELIA  Peradventure this is not Fortune's work neither,
but Nature's, who perceiveth our natural wits too
dull to reason of such goddesses, and hath sent
this natural for our whetstone, for always the dullness
of the fool is the whetstone of the wits. [To
Touchstone.] How now, wit, whither wander you?

TOUCHSTONE  Mistress, you must come away to your
father.

CELIA  Were you made the messenger?

TOUCHSTONE  No, by mine honor, but I was bid to come
for you.

ROSALIND  Where learned you that oath, fool?

TOUCHSTONE  Of a certain knight that swore by his
honor they were good pancakes, and swore by his
honor the mustard was naught. Now, I'll stand to it,
the pancakes were naught and the mustard was
good, and yet was not the knight forsworn.

CELIA  How prove you that in the great heap of your
knowledge?

ROSALIND  Ay, marry, now unmuzzle your wisdom.

TOUCHSTONE  Stand you both forth now: stroke your
chins, and swear by your beards that I am a knave.

CELIA  By our beards (if we had them), thou art.

TOUCHSTONE  By my knavery (if I had it), then I were.
But if you swear by that that is not, you are not
forsworn. No more was this knight swearing by his
honor, for he never had any, or if he had, he had
sworn it away before ever he saw those pancakes or
that mustard.

CELIA  Prithee, who is 't that thou mean'st?

TOUCHSTONE  One that old Frederick, your father, loves.

CELIA  My father's love is enough to honor him.
Enough. Speak no more of him; you'll be whipped
for taxation one of these days.

TOUCHSTONE  The more pity that fools may not speak
wisely what wise men do foolishly.

CELIA  By my troth, thou sayest true. For, since the little
wit that fools have was silenced, the little foolery
that wise men have makes a great show. Here
comes Monsieur Le Beau.

[Enter Le Beau.]


ROSALIND  With his mouth full of news.

CELIA  Which he will put on us as pigeons feed their
young.

ROSALIND  Then shall we be news-crammed.

CELIA  All the better. We shall be the more
marketable.--Bonjour, Monsieur Le Beau. What's
the news?

LE BEAU  Fair princess, you have lost much good sport.

CELIA  Sport? Of what color?

LE BEAU  What color, madam? How shall I answer you?

ROSALIND  As wit and fortune will.

TOUCHSTONE  Or as the destinies decrees.

CELIA  Well said. That was laid on with a trowel.

TOUCHSTONE  Nay, if I keep not my rank--

ROSALIND  Thou losest thy old smell.

LE BEAU  You amaze me, ladies. I would have told you of
good wrestling, which you have lost the sight of.

ROSALIND  Yet tell us the manner of the wrestling.

LE BEAU  I will tell you the beginning, and if it please
your Ladyships, you may see the end, for the best is
yet to do, and here, where you are, they are coming
to perform it.

CELIA  Well, the beginning that is dead and buried.

LE BEAU  There comes an old man and his three sons--

CELIA  I could match this beginning with an old tale.

LE BEAU  Three proper young men of excellent growth
and presence.

ROSALIND  With bills on their necks: "Be it known unto
all men by these presents."

LE BEAU  The eldest of the three wrestled with Charles,
the Duke's wrestler, which Charles in a moment
threw him and broke three of his ribs, that there is
little hope of life in him. So he served the second,
and so the third. Yonder they lie, the poor old man
their father making such pitiful dole over them that
all the beholders take his part with weeping.

ROSALIND  Alas!

TOUCHSTONE  But what is the sport, monsieur, that the
ladies have lost?

LE BEAU  Why, this that I speak of.

TOUCHSTONE  Thus men may grow wiser every day. It is
the first time that ever I heard breaking of ribs was
sport for ladies.

CELIA  Or I, I promise thee.

ROSALIND  But is there any else longs to see this broken
music in his sides? Is there yet another dotes upon
rib-breaking? Shall we see this wrestling, cousin?

LE BEAU  You must if you stay here, for here is the place
appointed for the wrestling, and they are ready to
perform it.

CELIA  Yonder sure they are coming. Let us now stay
and see it.

[Flourish. Enter Duke Frederick, Lords, Orlando,
Charles, and Attendants.]


DUKE FREDERICK  Come on. Since the youth will not be
entreated, his own peril on his forwardness.

ROSALIND, [to Le Beau]  Is yonder the man?

LE BEAU  Even he, madam.

CELIA  Alas, he is too young. Yet he looks successfully.

DUKE FREDERICK  How now, daughter and cousin? Are
you crept hither to see the wrestling?

ROSALIND  Ay, my liege, so please you give us leave.

DUKE FREDERICK  You will take little delight in it, I can
tell you, there is such odds in the man. In pity of the
challenger's youth, I would fain dissuade him, but
he will not be entreated. Speak to him, ladies; see if
you can move him.

CELIA  Call him hither, good Monsieur Le Beau.

DUKE FREDERICK  Do so. I'll not be by.
[He steps aside.]

LE BEAU, [to Orlando]  Monsieur the challenger, the
Princess calls for you.

ORLANDO  I attend them with all respect and duty.

ROSALIND  Young man, have you challenged Charles the
wrestler?

ORLANDO  No, fair princess. He is the general challenger.
I come but in as others do, to try with him the
strength of my youth.

CELIA  Young gentleman, your spirits are too bold for
your years. You have seen cruel proof of this man's
strength. If you saw yourself with your eyes or knew
yourself with your judgment, the fear of your adventure
would counsel you to a more equal enterprise.
We pray you for your own sake to embrace your
own safety and give over this attempt.

ROSALIND  Do, young sir. Your reputation shall not
therefore be misprized. We will make it our suit to
the Duke that the wrestling might not go forward.

ORLANDO  I beseech you, punish me not with your hard
thoughts, wherein I confess me much guilty to deny
so fair and excellent ladies anything. But let your
fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my trial,
wherein, if I be foiled, there is but one shamed that
was never gracious; if killed, but one dead that is
willing to be so. I shall do my friends no wrong, for
I have none to lament me; the world no injury, for
in it I have nothing. Only in the world I fill up a
place which may be better supplied when I have
made it empty.

ROSALIND  The little strength that I have, I would it
were with you.

CELIA  And mine, to eke out hers.

ROSALIND  Fare you well. Pray heaven I be deceived in
you.

CELIA  Your heart's desires be with you.

CHARLES  Come, where is this young gallant that is so
desirous to lie with his mother Earth?

ORLANDO  Ready, sir; but his will hath in it a more
modest working.

DUKE FREDERICK, [coming forward]  You shall try but
one fall.

CHARLES  No, I warrant your Grace you shall not entreat
him to a second, that have so mightily persuaded
him from a first.

ORLANDO  You mean to mock me after, you should not
have mocked me before. But come your ways.

ROSALIND  Now Hercules be thy speed, young man!

CELIA  I would I were invisible, to catch the strong
fellow by the leg.
[Orlando and Charles wrestle.]

ROSALIND  O excellent young man!

CELIA  If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can tell who
should down.
[Orlando throws Charles. Shout.]

DUKE FREDERICK  No more, no more.

ORLANDO  Yes, I beseech your Grace. I am not yet well
breathed.

DUKE FREDERICK  How dost thou, Charles?

LE BEAU  He cannot speak, my lord.

DUKE FREDERICK  Bear him away.
[Charles is carried off by Attendants.]
What is thy name, young man?

ORLANDO  Orlando, my liege, the youngest son of Sir
Rowland de Boys.

DUKE FREDERICK
I would thou hadst been son to some man else.
The world esteemed thy father honorable,
But I did find him still mine enemy.
Thou shouldst have better pleased me with this
deed
Hadst thou descended from another house.
But fare thee well. Thou art a gallant youth.
I would thou hadst told me of another father.
[Duke exits with Touchstone, Le Beau,
Lords, and Attendants.]

CELIA, [to Rosalind]
Were I my father, coz, would I do this?

ORLANDO
I am more proud to be Sir Rowland's son,
His youngest son, and would not change that calling
To be adopted heir to Frederick.

ROSALIND, [to Celia]
My father loved Sir Rowland as his soul,
And all the world was of my father's mind.
Had I before known this young man his son,
I should have given him tears unto entreaties
Ere he should thus have ventured.

CELIA  Gentle cousin,
Let us go thank him and encourage him.
My father's rough and envious disposition
Sticks me at heart.--Sir, you have well deserved.
If you do keep your promises in love
But justly, as you have exceeded all promise,
Your mistress shall be happy.

ROSALIND, [giving Orlando a chain from her neck]
Gentleman,
Wear this for me--one out of suits with Fortune,
That could give more but that her hand lacks
means.--
Shall we go, coz?

CELIA  Ay.--Fare you well, fair gentleman.

ORLANDO, [aside]
Can I not say "I thank you"? My better parts
Are all thrown down, and that which here stands up
Is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.

ROSALIND, [to Celia]
He calls us back. My pride fell with my fortunes.
I'll ask him what he would.--Did you call, sir?
Sir, you have wrestled well and overthrown
More than your enemies.

CELIA  Will you go, coz?

ROSALIND  Have with you. [To Orlando.] Fare you well.
[Rosalind and Celia exit.]

ORLANDO
What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue?
I cannot speak to her, yet she urged conference.
O poor Orlando! Thou art overthrown.
Or Charles or something weaker masters thee.

[Enter Le Beau.]


LE BEAU
Good sir, I do in friendship counsel you
To leave this place. Albeit you have deserved
High commendation, true applause, and love,
Yet such is now the Duke's condition
That he misconsters all that you have done.
The Duke is humorous. What he is indeed
More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.

ORLANDO
I thank you, sir, and pray you tell me this:
Which of the two was daughter of the duke
That here was at the wrestling?

LE BEAU
Neither his daughter, if we judge by manners,
But yet indeed the smaller is his daughter.
The other is daughter to the banished duke,
And here detained by her usurping uncle
To keep his daughter company, whose loves
Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters.
But I can tell you that of late this duke
Hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle niece,
Grounded upon no other argument
But that the people praise her for her virtues
And pity her for her good father's sake;
And, on my life, his malice 'gainst the lady
Will suddenly break forth. Sir, fare you well.
Hereafter, in a better world than this,
I shall desire more love and knowledge of you.

ORLANDO
I rest much bounden to you. Fare you well.
[Le Beau exits.]
Thus must I from the smoke into the smother,
From tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother.
But heavenly Rosalind!
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Celia and Rosalind.]


CELIA  Why, cousin! Why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy,
not a word?

ROSALIND  Not one to throw at a dog.

CELIA  No, thy words are too precious to be cast away
upon curs. Throw some of them at me. Come, lame
me with reasons.

ROSALIND  Then there were two cousins laid up, when
the one should be lamed with reasons, and the
other mad without any.

CELIA  But is all this for your father?

ROSALIND  No, some of it is for my child's father. O,
how full of briers is this working-day world!

CELIA  They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in
holiday foolery. If we walk not in the trodden paths,
our very petticoats will catch them.

ROSALIND  I could shake them off my coat. These burs
are in my heart.

CELIA  Hem them away.

ROSALIND  I would try, if I could cry "hem" and have
him.

CELIA  Come, come, wrestle with thy affections.

ROSALIND  O, they take the part of a better wrestler
than myself.

CELIA  O, a good wish upon you. You will try in time, in
despite of a fall. But turning these jests out of
service, let us talk in good earnest. Is it possible on
such a sudden you should fall into so strong a liking
with old Sir Rowland's youngest son?

ROSALIND  The Duke my father loved his father dearly.

CELIA  Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his
son dearly? By this kind of chase I should hate him,
for my father hated his father dearly. Yet I hate not
Orlando.

ROSALIND  No, faith, hate him not, for my sake.

CELIA  Why should I not? Doth he not deserve well?

ROSALIND  Let me love him for that, and do you love
him because I do.

[Enter Duke Frederick with Lords.]

Look, here comes the Duke.

CELIA  With his eyes full of anger.

DUKE FREDERICK, [to Rosalind]
Mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste,
And get you from our court.

ROSALIND  Me, uncle?

DUKE FREDERICK  You, cousin.
Within these ten days if that thou beest found
So near our public court as twenty miles,
Thou diest for it.

ROSALIND  I do beseech your Grace,
Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me.
If with myself I hold intelligence
Or have acquaintance with mine own desires,
If that I do not dream or be not frantic--
As I do trust I am not--then, dear uncle,
Never so much as in a thought unborn
Did I offend your Highness.

DUKE FREDERICK  Thus do all traitors.
If their purgation did consist in words,
They are as innocent as grace itself.
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not.

ROSALIND
Yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor.
Tell me whereon the likelihood depends.

DUKE FREDERICK
Thou art thy father's daughter. There's enough.

ROSALIND
So was I when your Highness took his dukedom.
So was I when your Highness banished him.
Treason is not inherited, my lord,
Or if we did derive it from our friends,
What's that to me? My father was no traitor.
Then, good my liege, mistake me not so much
To think my poverty is treacherous.

CELIA  Dear sovereign, hear me speak.

DUKE FREDERICK
Ay, Celia, we stayed her for your sake;
Else had she with her father ranged along.

CELIA
I did not then entreat to have her stay.
It was your pleasure and your own remorse.
I was too young that time to value her,
But now I know her. If she be a traitor,
Why, so am I. We still have slept together,
Rose at an instant, learned, played, eat together,
And, wheresoe'er we went, like Juno's swans
Still we went coupled and inseparable.

DUKE FREDERICK
She is too subtle for thee, and her smoothness,
Her very silence, and her patience
Speak to the people, and they pity her.
Thou art a fool. She robs thee of thy name,
And thou wilt show more bright and seem more
virtuous
When she is gone. Then open not thy lips.
Firm and irrevocable is my doom
Which I have passed upon her. She is banished.

CELIA
Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege.
I cannot live out of her company.

DUKE FREDERICK
You are a fool.--You, niece, provide yourself.
If you outstay the time, upon mine honor
And in the greatness of my word, you die.
[Duke and Lords exit.]

CELIA
O my poor Rosalind, whither wilt thou go?
Wilt thou change fathers? I will give thee mine.
I charge thee, be not thou more grieved than I am.

ROSALIND  I have more cause.

CELIA  Thou hast not, cousin.
Prithee, be cheerful. Know'st thou not the Duke
Hath banished me, his daughter?

ROSALIND  That he hath not.

CELIA
No, hath not? Rosalind lacks then the love
Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one.
Shall we be sundered? Shall we part, sweet girl?
No, let my father seek another heir.
Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
Whither to go, and what to bear with us,
And do not seek to take your change upon you,
To bear your griefs yourself and leave me out.
For, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale,
Say what thou canst, I'll go along with thee.

ROSALIND  Why, whither shall we go?

CELIA
To seek my uncle in the Forest of Arden.

ROSALIND
Alas, what danger will it be to us,
Maids as we are, to travel forth so far?
Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.

CELIA
I'll put myself in poor and mean attire,
And with a kind of umber smirch my face.
The like do you. So shall we pass along
And never stir assailants.

ROSALIND  Were it not better,
Because that I am more than common tall,
That I did suit me all points like a man?
A gallant curtal-ax upon my thigh,
A boar-spear in my hand, and in my heart
Lie there what hidden woman's fear there will,
We'll have a swashing and a martial outside--
As many other mannish cowards have
That do outface it with their semblances.

CELIA
What shall I call thee when thou art a man?

ROSALIND
I'll have no worse a name than Jove's own page,
And therefore look you call me Ganymede.
But what will you be called?

CELIA
Something that hath a reference to my state:
No longer Celia, but Aliena.

ROSALIND
But, cousin, what if we assayed to steal
The clownish fool out of your father's court?
Would he not be a comfort to our travel?

CELIA
He'll go along o'er the wide world with me.
Leave me alone to woo him. Let's away
And get our jewels and our wealth together,
Devise the fittest time and safest way
To hide us from pursuit that will be made
After my flight. Now go we in content
To liberty, and not to banishment.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Duke Senior, Amiens, and two or three Lords, like
foresters.]


DUKE SENIOR
Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile,
Hath not old custom made this life more sweet
Than that of painted pomp? Are not these woods
More free from peril than the envious court?
Here feel we not the penalty of Adam,
The seasons' difference, as the icy fang
And churlish chiding of the winter's wind,
Which when it bites and blows upon my body
Even till I shrink with cold, I smile and say
"This is no flattery. These are counselors
That feelingly persuade me what I am."
Sweet are the uses of adversity,
Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head.
And this our life, exempt from public haunt,
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,
Sermons in stones, and good in everything.

AMIENS
I would not change it. Happy is your Grace,
That can translate the stubbornness of fortune
Into so quiet and so sweet a style.

DUKE SENIOR
Come, shall we go and kill us venison?
And yet it irks me the poor dappled fools,
Being native burghers of this desert city,
Should in their own confines with forked heads
Have their round haunches gored.

FIRST LORD  Indeed, my lord,
The melancholy Jaques grieves at that,
And in that kind swears you do more usurp
Than doth your brother that hath banished you.
Today my Lord of Amiens and myself
Did steal behind him as he lay along
Under an oak, whose antique root peeps out
Upon the brook that brawls along this wood;
To the which place a poor sequestered stag
That from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt
Did come to languish. And indeed, my lord,
The wretched animal heaved forth such groans
That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
Almost to bursting, and the big round tears
Coursed one another down his innocent nose
In piteous chase. And thus the hairy fool,
Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,
Stood on th' extremest verge of the swift brook,
Augmenting it with tears.

DUKE SENIOR  But what said Jaques?
Did he not moralize this spectacle?

FIRST LORD
O yes, into a thousand similes.
First, for his weeping into the needless stream:
"Poor deer," quoth he, "thou mak'st a testament
As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
To that which had too much." Then, being there
alone,
Left and abandoned of his velvet friends:
"'Tis right," quoth he. "Thus misery doth part
The flux of company." Anon a careless herd,
Full of the pasture, jumps along by him
And never stays to greet him. "Ay," quoth Jaques,
"Sweep on, you fat and greasy citizens.
'Tis just the fashion. Wherefore do you look
Upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?"
Thus most invectively he pierceth through
The body of country, city, court,
Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we
Are mere usurpers, tyrants, and what's worse,
To fright the animals and to kill them up
In their assigned and native dwelling place.

DUKE SENIOR
And did you leave him in this contemplation?

SECOND LORD
We did, my lord, weeping and commenting
Upon the sobbing deer.

DUKE SENIOR  Show me the place.
I love to cope him in these sullen fits,
For then he's full of matter.

FIRST LORD  I'll bring you to him straight.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Duke Frederick with Lords.]


DUKE FREDERICK
Can it be possible that no man saw them?
It cannot be. Some villains of my court
Are of consent and sufferance in this.

FIRST LORD
I cannot hear of any that did see her.
The ladies her attendants of her chamber
Saw her abed, and in the morning early
They found the bed untreasured of their mistress.

SECOND LORD
My lord, the roinish clown at whom so oft
Your Grace was wont to laugh is also missing.
Hisperia, the Princess' gentlewoman,
Confesses that she secretly o'erheard
Your daughter and her cousin much commend
The parts and graces of the wrestler
That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles,
And she believes wherever they are gone
That youth is surely in their company.

DUKE FREDERICK
Send to his brother. Fetch that gallant hither.
If he be absent, bring his brother to me.
I'll make him find him. Do this suddenly,
And let not search and inquisition quail
To bring again these foolish runaways.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Orlando and Adam, meeting.]


ORLANDO  Who's there?

ADAM
What, my young master, O my gentle master,
O my sweet master, O you memory
Of old Sir Rowland! Why, what make you here?
Why are you virtuous? Why do people love you?
And wherefore are you gentle, strong, and valiant?
Why would you be so fond to overcome
The bonny prizer of the humorous duke?
Your praise is come too swiftly home before you.
Know you not, master, to some kind of men
Their graces serve them but as enemies?
No more do yours. Your virtues, gentle master,
Are sanctified and holy traitors to you.
O, what a world is this when what is comely
Envenoms him that bears it!

ORLANDO  Why, what's the matter?

ADAM  O unhappy youth,
Come not within these doors. Within this roof
The enemy of all your graces lives.
Your brother--no, no brother--yet the son--
Yet not the son, I will not call him son--
Of him I was about to call his father,
Hath heard your praises, and this night he means
To burn the lodging where you use to lie,
And you within it. If he fail of that,
He will have other means to cut you off.
I overheard him and his practices.
This is no place, this house is but a butchery.
Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.

ORLANDO
Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?

ADAM
No matter whither, so you come not here.

ORLANDO
What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food,
Or with a base and boist'rous sword enforce
A thievish living on the common road?
This I must do, or know not what to do;
Yet this I will not do, do how I can.
I rather will subject me to the malice
Of a diverted blood and bloody brother.

ADAM
But do not so. I have five hundred crowns,
The thrifty hire I saved under your father,
Which I did store to be my foster nurse
When service should in my old limbs lie lame,
And unregarded age in corners thrown.
Take that, and He that doth the ravens feed,
Yea, providently caters for the sparrow,
Be comfort to my age. Here is the gold.
All this I give you. Let me be your servant.
Though I look old, yet I am strong and lusty,
For in my youth I never did apply
Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood,
Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo
The means of weakness and debility.
Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
Frosty but kindly. Let me go with you.
I'll do the service of a younger man
In all your business and necessities.

ORLANDO
O good old man, how well in thee appears
The constant service of the antique world,
When service sweat for duty, not for meed.
Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
Where none will sweat but for promotion,
And having that do choke their service up
Even with the having. It is not so with thee.
But, poor old man, thou prun'st a rotten tree
That cannot so much as a blossom yield
In lieu of all thy pains and husbandry.
But come thy ways. We'll go along together,
And ere we have thy youthful wages spent,
We'll light upon some settled low content.

ADAM
Master, go on, and I will follow thee
To the last gasp with truth and loyalty.
From seventeen years till now almost fourscore
Here lived I, but now live here no more.
At seventeen years, many their fortunes seek,
But at fourscore, it is too late a week.
Yet fortune cannot recompense me better
Than to die well, and not my master's debtor.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Rosalind for Ganymede, Celia for Aliena, and
Clown, alias Touchstone.]


ROSALIND
O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits!

TOUCHSTONE  I care not for my spirits, if my legs were
not weary.

ROSALIND  I could find in my heart to disgrace my
man's apparel and to cry like a woman, but I must
comfort the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose
ought to show itself courageous to petticoat. Therefore
courage, good Aliena.

CELIA  I pray you bear with me. I cannot go no further.

TOUCHSTONE  For my part, I had rather bear with you
than bear you. Yet I should bear no cross if I did
bear you, for I think you have no money in your
purse.

ROSALIND  Well, this is the Forest of Arden.

TOUCHSTONE  Ay, now am I in Arden, the more fool I.
When I was at home I was in a better place, but
travelers must be content.

ROSALIND  Ay, be so, good Touchstone.

[Enter Corin and Silvius.]

Look you who comes here, a young man and an old
in solemn talk.

[Rosalind, Celia, and Touchstone step aside and
eavesdrop.]



CORIN, [to Silvius]
That is the way to make her scorn you still.

SILVIUS
O Corin, that thou knew'st how I do love her!

CORIN
I partly guess, for I have loved ere now.

SILVIUS
No, Corin, being old, thou canst not guess,
Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover
As ever sighed upon a midnight pillow.
But if thy love were ever like to mine--
As sure I think did never man love so--
How many actions most ridiculous
Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?

CORIN
Into a thousand that I have forgotten.

SILVIUS
O, thou didst then never love so heartily.
If thou rememb'rest not the slightest folly
That ever love did make thee run into,
Thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,
Wearing thy hearer in thy mistress' praise,
Thou hast not loved.
Or if thou hast not broke from company
Abruptly, as my passion now makes me,
Thou hast not loved.
O Phoebe, Phoebe, Phoebe!	[He exits.]

ROSALIND
Alas, poor shepherd, searching of thy wound,
I have by hard adventure found mine own.

TOUCHSTONE  And I mine. I remember when I was in
love I broke my sword upon a stone and bid him
take that for coming a-night to Jane Smile; and I
remember the kissing of her batler, and the cow's
dugs that her pretty chopped hands had milked;
and I remember the wooing of a peascod instead of
her, from whom I took two cods and, giving her
them again, said with weeping tears "Wear these for
my sake." We that are true lovers run into strange
capers. But as all is mortal in nature, so is all nature
in love mortal in folly.

ROSALIND  Thou speak'st wiser than thou art ware of.

TOUCHSTONE  Nay, I shall ne'er be ware of mine own
wit till I break my shins against it.

ROSALIND
Jove, Jove, this shepherd's passion
Is much upon my fashion.

TOUCHSTONE  And mine, but it grows something stale
with me.

CELIA  I pray you, one of you question yond man, if he
for gold will give us any food. I faint almost to death.

TOUCHSTONE, [to Corin]  Holla, you clown!

ROSALIND  Peace, fool. He's not thy kinsman.

CORIN  Who calls?

TOUCHSTONE  Your betters, sir.

CORIN  Else are they very wretched.

ROSALIND, [to Touchstone]
Peace, I say. [As Ganymede, to Corin.]
 Good even toyou, friend.

CORIN
And to you, gentle sir, and to you all.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]
I prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold
Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed.
Here's a young maid with travel much oppressed,
And faints for succor.

CORIN  Fair sir, I pity her
And wish for her sake more than for mine own
My fortunes were more able to relieve her.
But I am shepherd to another man
And do not shear the fleeces that I graze.
My master is of churlish disposition
And little recks to find the way to heaven
By doing deeds of hospitality.
Besides, his cote, his flocks, and bounds of feed
Are now on sale, and at our sheepcote now,
By reason of his absence, there is nothing
That you will feed on. But what is, come see,
And in my voice most welcome shall you be.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]
What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?

CORIN
That young swain that you saw here but erewhile,
That little cares for buying anything.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]
I pray thee, if it stand with honesty,
Buy thou the cottage, pasture, and the flock,
And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.

CELIA, [as Aliena]
And we will mend thy wages. I like this place,
And willingly could waste my time in it.

CORIN
Assuredly the thing is to be sold.
Go with me. If you like upon report
The soil, the profit, and this kind of life,
I will your very faithful feeder be
And buy it with your gold right suddenly.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Amiens, Jaques, and others.]

Song.

AMIENS [sings]
	   Under the greenwood tree
	   Who loves to lie with me
	   And turn his merry note
	   Unto the sweet bird's throat,
	Come hither, come hither, come hither.
	      Here shall he see
	      No enemy
	But winter and rough weather.

JAQUES  More, more, I prithee, more.

AMIENS  It will make you melancholy, Monsieur
Jaques.

JAQUES  I thank it. More, I prithee, more. I can suck
melancholy out of a song as a weasel sucks eggs.
More, I prithee, more.

AMIENS  My voice is ragged. I know I cannot please you.

JAQUES  I do not desire you to please me. I do desire
you to sing. Come, more, another stanzo. Call you
'em "stanzos"?

AMIENS  What you will, Monsieur Jaques.

JAQUES  Nay, I care not for their names. They owe me
nothing. Will you sing?

AMIENS  More at your request than to please myself.

JAQUES  Well then, if ever I thank any man, I'll thank
you. But that they call "compliment" is like th'
encounter of two dog-apes. And when a man thanks
me heartily, methinks I have given him a penny and
he renders me the beggarly thanks. Come, sing. And
you that will not, hold your tongues.

AMIENS  Well, I'll end the song.--Sirs, cover the while;
the Duke will drink under this tree.--He hath been
all this day to look you.

JAQUES  And I have been all this day to avoid him. He is
too disputable for my company. I think of as many
matters as he, but I give heaven thanks and make no
boast of them. Come, warble, come.

Song.


ALL [together here.]
	   Who doth ambition shun
	   And loves to live i' th' sun,
	   Seeking the food he eats
	   And pleased with what he gets,
	Come hither, come hither, come hither.
	      Here shall he see
	      No enemy
	But winter and rough weather.

JAQUES  I'll give you a verse to this note that I made
yesterday in despite of my invention.

AMIENS  And I'll sing it.

JAQUES  Thus it goes:
	   If it do come to pass
	   That any man turn ass,
	   Leaving his wealth and ease
	   A stubborn will to please,
	Ducdame, ducdame, ducdame.
	      Here shall he see
	      Gross fools as he,
	An if he will come to me.

AMIENS  What's that "ducdame"?

JAQUES  'Tis a Greek invocation to call fools into a
circle. I'll go sleep if I can. If I cannot, I'll rail
against all the first-born of Egypt.

AMIENS  And I'll go seek the Duke. His banquet is
prepared.
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Orlando and Adam.]


ADAM  Dear master, I can go no further. O, I die for
food. Here lie I down and measure out my grave.
Farewell, kind master.	[He lies down.]

ORLANDO  Why, how now, Adam? No greater heart in
thee? Live a little, comfort a little, cheer thyself a
little. If this uncouth forest yield anything savage, I
will either be food for it or bring it for food to thee.
Thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers. For my
sake, be comfortable. Hold death awhile at the
arm's end. I will here be with thee presently, and if
I bring thee not something to eat, I will give thee
leave to die. But if thou diest before I come, thou art
a mocker of my labor. Well said. Thou look'st
cheerly, and I'll be with thee quickly. Yet thou liest
in the bleak air. Come, I will bear thee to some
shelter, and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinner if
there live anything in this desert. Cheerly, good
Adam.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter Duke Senior and Lords, like outlaws.]


DUKE SENIOR
I think he be transformed into a beast,
For I can nowhere find him like a man.

FIRST LORD
My lord, he is but even now gone hence.
Here was he merry, hearing of a song.

DUKE SENIOR
If he, compact of jars, grow musical,
We shall have shortly discord in the spheres.
Go seek him. Tell him I would speak with him.

[Enter Jaques.]


FIRST LORD
He saves my labor by his own approach.

DUKE SENIOR, [to Jaques]
Why, how now, monsieur? What a life is this
That your poor friends must woo your company?
What, you look merrily.

JAQUES
A fool, a fool, I met a fool i' th' forest,
A motley fool. A miserable world!
As I do live by food, I met a fool,
Who laid him down and basked him in the sun
And railed on Lady Fortune in good terms,
In good set terms, and yet a motley fool.
"Good morrow, fool," quoth I. "No, sir," quoth he,
"Call me not 'fool' till heaven hath sent me
fortune."
And then he drew a dial from his poke
And, looking on it with lack-luster eye,
Says very wisely "It is ten o'clock.
Thus we may see," quoth he, "how the world wags.
'Tis but an hour ago since it was nine,
And after one hour more 'twill be eleven.
And so from hour to hour we ripe and ripe,
And then from hour to hour we rot and rot,
And thereby hangs a tale." When I did hear
The motley fool thus moral on the time,
My lungs began to crow like chanticleer
That fools should be so deep-contemplative,
And I did laugh sans intermission
An hour by his dial. O noble fool!
A worthy fool! Motley's the only wear.

DUKE SENIOR  What fool is this?

JAQUES
O worthy fool!--One that hath been a courtier,
And says "If ladies be but young and fair,
They have the gift to know it." And in his brain,
Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
After a voyage, he hath strange places crammed
With observation, the which he vents
In mangled forms. O, that I were a fool!
I am ambitious for a motley coat.

DUKE SENIOR
Thou shalt have one.

JAQUES  It is my only suit,
Provided that you weed your better judgments
Of all opinion that grows rank in them
That I am wise. I must have liberty
Withal, as large a charter as the wind,
To blow on whom I please, for so fools have.
And they that are most galled with my folly,
They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so?
The "why" is plain as way to parish church:
He that a fool doth very wisely hit
Doth very foolishly, although he smart,
Not to seem senseless of the bob. If not,
The wise man's folly is anatomized
Even by the squand'ring glances of the fool.
Invest me in my motley. Give me leave
To speak my mind, and I will through and through
Cleanse the foul body of th' infected world,
If they will patiently receive my medicine.

DUKE SENIOR
Fie on thee! I can tell what thou wouldst do.

JAQUES
What, for a counter, would I do but good?

DUKE SENIOR
Most mischievous foul sin in chiding sin;
For thou thyself hast been a libertine,
As sensual as the brutish sting itself,
And all th' embossed sores and headed evils
That thou with license of free foot hast caught
Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.

JAQUES  Why, who cries out on pride
That can therein tax any private party?
Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea
Till that the weary very means do ebb?
What woman in the city do I name
When that I say the city-woman bears
The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?
Who can come in and say that I mean her,
When such a one as she such is her neighbor?
Or what is he of basest function
That says his bravery is not on my cost,
Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
His folly to the mettle of my speech?
There then. How then, what then? Let me see
wherein
My tongue hath wronged him. If it do him right,
Then he hath wronged himself. If he be free,
Why then my taxing like a wild goose flies
Unclaimed of any man.

[Enter Orlando, brandishing a sword.]

But who comes here?

ORLANDO  Forbear, and eat no more.

JAQUES  Why, I have eat none yet.

ORLANDO
Nor shalt not till necessity be served.

JAQUES  Of what kind should this cock come of?

DUKE SENIOR, [to Orlando]
Art thou thus boldened, man, by thy distress,
Or else a rude despiser of good manners,
That in civility thou seem'st so empty?

ORLANDO
You touched my vein at first. The thorny point
Of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show
Of smooth civility, yet am I inland bred
And know some nurture. But forbear, I say.
He dies that touches any of this fruit
Till I and my affairs are answered.

JAQUES  An you will not be answered with reason, I
must die.

DUKE SENIOR, [to Orlando]
What would you have? Your gentleness shall force
More than your force move us to gentleness.

ORLANDO
I almost die for food, and let me have it.

DUKE SENIOR
Sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.

ORLANDO
Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you.
I thought that all things had been savage here,
And therefore put I on the countenance
Of stern commandment. But whate'er you are
That in this desert inaccessible,
Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
Lose and neglect the creeping hours of time,
If ever you have looked on better days,
If ever been where bells have knolled to church,
If ever sat at any good man's feast,
If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear
And know what 'tis to pity and be pitied,
Let gentleness my strong enforcement be,
In the which hope I blush and hide my sword.
[He sheathes his sword.]

DUKE SENIOR
True is it that we have seen better days,
And have with holy bell been knolled to church,
And sat at good men's feasts and wiped our eyes
Of drops that sacred pity hath engendered.
And therefore sit you down in gentleness,
And take upon command what help we have
That to your wanting may be ministered.

ORLANDO
Then but forbear your food a little while
Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn
And give it food. There is an old poor man
Who after me hath many a weary step
Limped in pure love. Till he be first sufficed,
Oppressed with two weak evils, age and hunger,
I will not touch a bit.

DUKE SENIOR  Go find him out,
And we will nothing waste till you return.

ORLANDO
I thank you; and be blessed for your good comfort.
[He exits.]

DUKE SENIOR
Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy.
This wide and universal theater
Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
Wherein we play in.

JAQUES  All the world's a stage,
And all the men and women merely players.
They have their exits and their entrances,
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.
Then the whining schoolboy with his satchel
And shining morning face, creeping like snail
Unwillingly to school. And then the lover,
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his mistress' eyebrow. Then a soldier,
Full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,
Jealous in honor, sudden and quick in quarrel,
Seeking the bubble reputation
Even in the cannon's mouth. And then the justice,
In fair round belly with good capon lined,
With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
Full of wise saws and modern instances;
And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slippered pantaloon
With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide
For his shrunk shank, and his big manly voice,
Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound. Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second childishness and mere oblivion,
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.

[Enter Orlando, carrying Adam.]


DUKE SENIOR
Welcome. Set down your venerable burden,
And let him feed.

ORLANDO  I thank you most for him.

ADAM  So had you need.--
I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.

DUKE SENIOR
Welcome. Fall to. I will not trouble you
As yet to question you about your fortunes.--
Give us some music, and, good cousin, sing.

[The Duke and Orlando continue their conversation,
apart.]


Song.


AMIENS [sings]
	   Blow, blow, thou winter wind.
	   Thou art not so unkind
	      As man's ingratitude.
	   Thy tooth is not so keen,
	   Because thou art not seen,
	      Although thy breath be rude.
	Heigh-ho, sing heigh-ho, unto the green holly.
	Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly.
	      Then heigh-ho, the holly.
	      This life is most jolly.

	   Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
	   That dost not bite so nigh
	      As benefits forgot.
	   Though thou the waters warp,
	   Thy sting is not so sharp
	      As friend remembered not.
	Heigh-ho, sing heigh-ho, unto the green holly.
	Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly.
	      Then heigh-ho, the holly.
	      This life is most jolly.

DUKE SENIOR, [to Orlando]
If that you were the good Sir Rowland's son,
As you have whispered faithfully you were,
And as mine eye doth his effigies witness
Most truly limned and living in your face,
Be truly welcome hither. I am the duke
That loved your father. The residue of your fortune
Go to my cave and tell me.--Good old man,
Thou art right welcome as thy master is.
[To Lords.] Support him by the arm. [To Orlando.]
Give me your hand,
And let me all your fortunes understand.
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Duke Frederick, Lords, and Oliver.]


DUKE FREDERICK, [to Oliver]
Not see him since? Sir, sir, that cannot be.
But were I not the better part made mercy,
I should not seek an absent argument
Of my revenge, thou present. But look to it:
Find out thy brother wheresoe'er he is.
Seek him with candle. Bring him, dead or living,
Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more
To seek a living in our territory.
Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine,
Worth seizure, do we seize into our hands
Till thou canst quit thee by thy brother's mouth
Of what we think against thee.

OLIVER
O, that your Highness knew my heart in this:
I never loved my brother in my life.

DUKE FREDERICK
More villain thou.--Well, push him out of doors,
And let my officers of such a nature
Make an extent upon his house and lands.
Do this expediently, and turn him going.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Orlando, with a paper.]


ORLANDO
Hang there, my verse, in witness of my love.
   And thou, thrice-crowned queen of night, survey
With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,
   Thy huntress' name that my full life doth sway.
O Rosalind, these trees shall be my books,
   And in their barks my thoughts I'll character,
That every eye which in this forest looks
   Shall see thy virtue witnessed everywhere.
Run, run, Orlando, carve on every tree
The fair, the chaste, and unexpressive she.
[He exits.]

[Enter Corin and Touchstone.]


CORIN  And how like you this shepherd's life, Master
Touchstone?

TOUCHSTONE  Truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a
good life; but in respect that it is a shepherd's life, it
is naught. In respect that it is solitary, I like it very
well; but in respect that it is private, it is a very vile
life. Now in respect it is in the fields, it pleaseth me
well; but in respect it is not in the court, it is
tedious. As it is a spare life, look you, it fits my
humor well; but as there is no more plenty in it, it
goes much against my stomach. Hast any philosophy
in thee, shepherd?

CORIN  No more but that I know the more one sickens,
the worse at ease he is, and that he that wants
money, means, and content is without three good
friends; that the property of rain is to wet, and fire
to burn; that good pasture makes fat sheep; and that
a great cause of the night is lack of the sun; that he
that hath learned no wit by nature nor art may
complain of good breeding or comes of a very dull
kindred.

TOUCHSTONE  Such a one is a natural philosopher. Wast
ever in court, shepherd?

CORIN  No, truly.

TOUCHSTONE  Then thou art damned.

CORIN  Nay, I hope.

TOUCHSTONE  Truly, thou art damned, like an ill-roasted
egg, all on one side.

CORIN  For not being at court? Your reason.

TOUCHSTONE  Why, if thou never wast at court, thou
never saw'st good manners; if thou never saw'st
good manners, then thy manners must be wicked,
and wickedness is sin, and sin is damnation. Thou
art in a parlous state, shepherd.

CORIN  Not a whit, Touchstone. Those that are good
manners at the court are as ridiculous in the
country as the behavior of the country is most
mockable at the court. You told me you salute not at
the court but you kiss your hands. That courtesy
would be uncleanly if courtiers were shepherds.

TOUCHSTONE  Instance, briefly. Come, instance.

CORIN  Why, we are still handling our ewes, and their
fells, you know, are greasy.

TOUCHSTONE  Why, do not your courtier's hands sweat?
And is not the grease of a mutton as wholesome as
the sweat of a man? Shallow, shallow. A better
instance, I say. Come.

CORIN  Besides, our hands are hard.

TOUCHSTONE  Your lips will feel them the sooner. Shallow
again. A more sounder instance. Come.

CORIN  And they are often tarred over with the surgery
of our sheep; and would you have us kiss tar? The
courtier's hands are perfumed with civet.

TOUCHSTONE  Most shallow man. Thou worms' meat in
respect of a good piece of flesh, indeed. Learn of the
wise and perpend: civet is of a baser birth than tar,
the very uncleanly flux of a cat. Mend the instance,
shepherd.

CORIN  You have too courtly a wit for me. I'll rest.

TOUCHSTONE  Wilt thou rest damned? God help thee,
shallow man. God make incision in thee; thou art
raw.

CORIN  Sir, I am a true laborer. I earn that I eat, get that
I wear, owe no man hate, envy no man's happiness,
glad of other men's good, content with my harm,
and the greatest of my pride is to see my ewes graze
and my lambs suck.

TOUCHSTONE  That is another simple sin in you, to bring
the ewes and the rams together and to offer to get
your living by the copulation of cattle; to be bawd to
a bell-wether and to betray a she-lamb of a twelvemonth
to a crooked-pated old cuckoldly ram, out of
all reasonable match. If thou be'st not damned for
this, the devil himself will have no shepherds. I
cannot see else how thou shouldst 'scape.

[Enter Rosalind, as Ganymede.]


CORIN  Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new
mistress's brother.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede, reading a paper]
	From the east to western Ind
	No jewel is like Rosalind.
	Her worth being mounted on the wind,
	Through all the world bears Rosalind.
	All the pictures fairest lined
	Are but black to Rosalind.
	Let no face be kept in mind
	But the fair of Rosalind.

TOUCHSTONE  I'll rhyme you so eight years together,
dinners and suppers and sleeping hours excepted.
It is the right butter-women's rank to market.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Out, fool.

TOUCHSTONE  For a taste:
	If a hart do lack a hind,
	Let him seek out Rosalind.
	If the cat will after kind,
	So be sure will Rosalind.
	Wintered garments must be lined;
	So must slender Rosalind.
	They that reap must sheaf and bind;
	Then to cart with Rosalind.
	Sweetest nut hath sourest rind;
	Such a nut is Rosalind.
	He that sweetest rose will find
	Must find love's prick, and Rosalind.
This is the very false gallop of verses. Why do you
infect yourself with them?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Peace, you dull fool. I found
them on a tree.

TOUCHSTONE  Truly, the tree yields bad fruit.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  I'll graft it with you, and
then I shall graft it with a medlar. Then it will be
the earliest fruit i' th' country, for you'll be rotten
ere you be half ripe, and that's the right virtue of
the medlar.

TOUCHSTONE  You have said, but whether wisely or no,
let the forest judge.

[Enter Celia, as Aliena, with a writing.]


ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Peace. Here comes my sister
reading. Stand aside.

CELIA, [as Aliena, reads]
	Why should this a desert be?
	   For it is unpeopled? No.
	Tongues I'll hang on every tree
	   That shall civil sayings show.
	Some how brief the life of man
	   Runs his erring pilgrimage,
	That the stretching of a span
	   Buckles in his sum of age;
	Some of violated vows
	   'Twixt the souls of friend and friend.
	But upon the fairest boughs,
	   Or at every sentence' end,
	Will I "Rosalinda" write,
	   Teaching all that read to know
	The quintessence of every sprite
	   Heaven would in little show.
	Therefore heaven nature charged
	   That one body should be filled
	With all graces wide-enlarged.
	   Nature presently distilled
	Helen's cheek, but not her heart,
	   Cleopatra's majesty,
	Atalanta's better part,
	   Sad Lucretia's modesty.
	Thus Rosalind of many parts
	   By heavenly synod was devised
	Of many faces, eyes, and hearts
	   To have the touches dearest prized.
	Heaven would that she these gifts should have
	And I to live and die her slave.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  O most gentle Jupiter, what
tedious homily of love have you wearied your parishioners
withal, and never cried "Have patience,
good people!"

CELIA, [as Aliena]  How now?--Back, friends. Shepherd,
go off a little.--Go with him, sirrah.

TOUCHSTONE  Come, shepherd, let us make an honorable
retreat, though not with bag and baggage, yet
with scrip and scrippage.
[Touchstone and Corin exit.]

CELIA  Didst thou hear these verses?

ROSALIND  O yes, I heard them all, and more too, for
some of them had in them more feet than the verses
would bear.

CELIA  That's no matter. The feet might bear the verses.

ROSALIND  Ay, but the feet were lame and could not
bear themselves without the verse, and therefore
stood lamely in the verse.

CELIA  But didst thou hear without wondering how thy
name should be hanged and carved upon these
trees?

ROSALIND  I was seven of the nine days out of the
wonder before you came, for look here what I
found on a palm tree. [She shows the paper she
read.] I was never so berhymed since Pythagoras'
time that I was an Irish rat, which I can hardly
remember.

CELIA  Trow you who hath done this?

ROSALIND  Is it a man?

CELIA  And a chain, that you once wore, about his neck.
Change you color?

ROSALIND  I prithee, who?

CELIA  O Lord, Lord, it is a hard matter for friends to
meet, but mountains may be removed with earthquakes
and so encounter.

ROSALIND  Nay, but who is it?

CELIA  Is it possible?

ROSALIND  Nay, I prithee now, with most petitionary
vehemence, tell me who it is.

CELIA  O wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful
wonderful, and yet again wonderful, and after that
out of all whooping!

ROSALIND  Good my complexion, dost thou think
though I am caparisoned like a man, I have a
doublet and hose in my disposition? One inch of
delay more is a South Sea of discovery. I prithee,
tell me who is it quickly, and speak apace. I would
thou couldst stammer, that thou might'st pour this
concealed man out of thy mouth as wine comes out
of a narrow-mouthed bottle--either too much at
once, or none at all. I prithee take the cork out of
thy mouth, that I may drink thy tidings.

CELIA  So you may put a man in your belly.

ROSALIND  Is he of God's making? What manner of
man? Is his head worth a hat, or his chin worth a
beard?

CELIA  Nay, he hath but a little beard.

ROSALIND  Why, God will send more, if the man will be
thankful. Let me stay the growth of his beard, if
thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.

CELIA  It is young Orlando, that tripped up the wrestler's
heels and your heart both in an instant.

ROSALIND  Nay, but the devil take mocking. Speak sad
brow and true maid.

CELIA  I' faith, coz, 'tis he.

ROSALIND  Orlando?

CELIA  Orlando.

ROSALIND  Alas the day, what shall I do with my doublet
and hose? What did he when thou saw'st him? What
said he? How looked he? Wherein went he? What
makes he here? Did he ask for me? Where remains
he? How parted he with thee? And when shalt thou
see him again? Answer me in one word.

CELIA  You must borrow me Gargantua's mouth first.
'Tis a word too great for any mouth of this age's size.
To say ay and no to these particulars is more than to
answer in a catechism.

ROSALIND  But doth he know that I am in this forest and
in man's apparel? Looks he as freshly as he did the
day he wrestled?

CELIA  It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the
propositions of a lover. But take a taste of my
finding him, and relish it with good observance. I
found him under a tree like a dropped acorn.

ROSALIND  It may well be called Jove's tree when it
drops forth such fruit.

CELIA  Give me audience, good madam.

ROSALIND  Proceed.

CELIA  There lay he, stretched along like a wounded
knight.

ROSALIND  Though it be pity to see such a sight, it well
becomes the ground.

CELIA  Cry "holla" to thy tongue, I prithee. It curvets
unseasonably. He was furnished like a hunter.

ROSALIND  O, ominous! He comes to kill my heart.

CELIA  I would sing my song without a burden. Thou
bring'st me out of tune.

ROSALIND  Do you not know I am a woman? When I
think, I must speak. Sweet, say on.

CELIA  You bring me out.

[Enter Orlando and Jaques.]

Soft, comes he not here?

ROSALIND  'Tis he. Slink by, and note him.
[Rosalind and Celia step aside.]

JAQUES, [to Orlando]  I thank you for your company,
but, good faith, I had as lief have been myself alone.

ORLANDO  And so had I, but yet, for fashion sake, I
thank you too for your society.

JAQUES  God be wi' you. Let's meet as little as we can.

ORLANDO  I do desire we may be better strangers.

JAQUES  I pray you mar no more trees with writing love
songs in their barks.

ORLANDO  I pray you mar no more of my verses with
reading them ill-favoredly.

JAQUES  Rosalind is your love's name?

ORLANDO  Yes, just.

JAQUES  I do not like her name.

ORLANDO  There was no thought of pleasing you when
she was christened.

JAQUES  What stature is she of?

ORLANDO  Just as high as my heart.

JAQUES  You are full of pretty answers. Have you not
been acquainted with goldsmiths' wives and
conned them out of rings?

ORLANDO  Not so. But I answer you right painted cloth,
from whence you have studied your questions.

JAQUES  You have a nimble wit. I think 'twas made of
Atalanta's heels. Will you sit down with me? And we
two will rail against our mistress the world and all
our misery.

ORLANDO  I will chide no breather in the world but
myself, against whom I know most faults.

JAQUES  The worst fault you have is to be in love.

ORLANDO  'Tis a fault I will not change for your best
virtue. I am weary of you.

JAQUES  By my troth, I was seeking for a fool when I
found you.

ORLANDO  He is drowned in the brook. Look but in, and
you shall see him.

JAQUES  There I shall see mine own figure.

ORLANDO  Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher.

JAQUES  I'll tarry no longer with you. Farewell, good
Signior Love.

ORLANDO  I am glad of your departure. Adieu, good
Monsieur Melancholy.	[Jaques exits.]

ROSALIND, [aside to Celia]  I will speak to him like a
saucy lackey, and under that habit play the knave
with him. [As Ganymede.] Do you hear, forester?

ORLANDO  Very well. What would you?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  I pray you, what is 't
o'clock?

ORLANDO  You should ask me what time o' day. There's
no clock in the forest.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Then there is no true lover
in the forest; else sighing every minute and
groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot of
time as well as a clock.

ORLANDO  And why not the swift foot of time? Had not
that been as proper?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  By no means, sir. Time
travels in divers paces with divers persons. I'll tell
you who time ambles withal, who time trots withal,
who time gallops withal, and who he stands still
withal.

ORLANDO  I prithee, who doth he trot withal?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Marry, he trots hard with a
young maid between the contract of her marriage
and the day it is solemnized. If the interim be but a
se'nnight, time's pace is so hard that it seems the
length of seven year.

ORLANDO  Who ambles time withal?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  With a priest that lacks Latin
and a rich man that hath not the gout, for the one
sleeps easily because he cannot study, and the other
lives merrily because he feels no pain--the one
lacking the burden of lean and wasteful learning,
the other knowing no burden of heavy tedious
penury. These time ambles withal.

ORLANDO  Who doth he gallop withal?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  With a thief to the gallows,
for though he go as softly as foot can fall, he thinks
himself too soon there.

ORLANDO  Who stays it still withal?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  With lawyers in the vacation,
for they sleep between term and term, and
then they perceive not how time moves.

ORLANDO  Where dwell you, pretty youth?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  With this shepherdess, my
sister, here in the skirts of the forest, like fringe
upon a petticoat.

ORLANDO  Are you native of this place?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  As the cony that you see
dwell where she is kindled.

ORLANDO  Your accent is something finer than you
could purchase in so removed a dwelling.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  I have been told so of many.
But indeed an old religious uncle of mine taught
me to speak, who was in his youth an inland man,
one that knew courtship too well, for there he fell in
love. I have heard him read many lectures against it,
and I thank God I am not a woman, to be touched
with so many giddy offenses as he hath generally
taxed their whole sex withal.

ORLANDO  Can you remember any of the principal evils
that he laid to the charge of women?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  There were none principal.
They were all like one another as halfpence are,
every one fault seeming monstrous till his fellow
fault came to match it.

ORLANDO  I prithee recount some of them.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  No, I will not cast away my
physic but on those that are sick. There is a man
haunts the forest that abuses our young plants with
carving "Rosalind" on their barks, hangs odes upon
hawthorns and elegies on brambles, all, forsooth,
deifying the name of Rosalind. If I could meet
that fancy-monger, I would give him some good
counsel, for he seems to have the quotidian of love
upon him.

ORLANDO  I am he that is so love-shaked. I pray you tell
me your remedy.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  There is none of my uncle's
marks upon you. He taught me how to know a man
in love, in which cage of rushes I am sure you are
not prisoner.

ORLANDO  What were his marks?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  A lean cheek, which you
have not; a blue eye and sunken, which you have
not; an unquestionable spirit, which you have not; a
beard neglected, which you have not--but I pardon
you for that, for simply your having in beard is a
younger brother's revenue. Then your hose should
be ungartered, your bonnet unbanded, your sleeve
unbuttoned, your shoe untied, and everything
about you demonstrating a careless desolation. But
you are no such man. You are rather point-device in
your accouterments, as loving yourself than seeming
the lover of any other.

ORLANDO  Fair youth, I would I could make thee believe
I love.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Me believe it? You may as
soon make her that you love believe it, which I
warrant she is apter to do than to confess she does.
That is one of the points in the which women still
give the lie to their consciences. But, in good sooth,
are you he that hangs the verses on the trees
wherein Rosalind is so admired?

ORLANDO  I swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of
Rosalind, I am that he, that unfortunate he.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  But are you so much in love
as your rhymes speak?

ORLANDO  Neither rhyme nor reason can express how
much.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Love is merely a madness,
and, I tell you, deserves as well a dark house and a
whip as madmen do; and the reason why they are
not so punished and cured is that the lunacy is so
ordinary that the whippers are in love too. Yet I
profess curing it by counsel.

ORLANDO  Did you ever cure any so?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Yes, one, and in this manner.
He was to imagine me his love, his mistress,
and I set him every day to woo me; at which time
would I, being but a moonish youth, grieve, be
effeminate, changeable, longing and liking, proud,
fantastical, apish, shallow, inconstant, full of tears,
full of smiles; for every passion something, and for
no passion truly anything, as boys and women are,
for the most part, cattle of this color; would now
like him, now loathe him; then entertain him, then
forswear him; now weep for him, then spit at him,
that I drave my suitor from his mad humor of love
to a living humor of madness, which was to forswear
the full stream of the world and to live in a
nook merely monastic. And thus I cured him, and
this way will I take upon me to wash your liver as
clean as a sound sheep's heart, that there shall not
be one spot of love in 't.

ORLANDO  I would not be cured, youth.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  I would cure you if you
would but call me Rosalind and come every day to
my cote and woo me.

ORLANDO  Now, by the faith of my love, I will. Tell me
where it is.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Go with me to it, and I'll
show it you; and by the way you shall tell me where
in the forest you live. Will you go?

ORLANDO  With all my heart, good youth.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Nay, you must call me
Rosalind.--Come, sister, will you go?
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Touchstone and Audrey, followed by Jaques.]


TOUCHSTONE  Come apace, good Audrey. I will fetch up
your goats, Audrey. And how, Audrey? Am I the
man yet? Doth my simple feature content you?

AUDREY  Your features, Lord warrant us! What
features?

TOUCHSTONE  I am here with thee and thy goats, as the
most capricious poet, honest Ovid, was among the
Goths.

JAQUES, [aside]  O knowledge ill-inhabited, worse than
Jove in a thatched house.

TOUCHSTONE  When a man's verses cannot be understood,
nor a man's good wit seconded with the
forward child, understanding, it strikes a man more
dead than a great reckoning in a little room. Truly, I
would the gods had made thee poetical.

AUDREY  I do not know what "poetical" is. Is it honest
in deed and word? Is it a true thing?

TOUCHSTONE  No, truly, for the truest poetry is the most
feigning, and lovers are given to poetry, and what
they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do
feign.

AUDREY  Do you wish, then, that the gods had made me
poetical?

TOUCHSTONE  I do, truly, for thou swear'st to me thou
art honest. Now if thou wert a poet, I might have
some hope thou didst feign.

AUDREY  Would you not have me honest?

TOUCHSTONE  No, truly, unless thou wert hard-favored;
for honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a
sauce to sugar.

JAQUES, [aside]  A material fool.

AUDREY  Well, I am not fair, and therefore I pray the
gods make me honest.

TOUCHSTONE  Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a
foul slut were to put good meat into an unclean
dish.

AUDREY  I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am
foul.

TOUCHSTONE  Well, praised be the gods for thy foulness;
sluttishness may come hereafter. But be it as it may
be, I will marry thee; and to that end I have been
with Sir Oliver Martext, the vicar of the next village,
who hath promised to meet me in this place of the
forest and to couple us.

JAQUES, [aside]  I would fain see this meeting.

AUDREY  Well, the gods give us joy.

TOUCHSTONE  Amen. A man may, if he were of a fearful
heart, stagger in this attempt, for here we have no
temple but the wood, no assembly but horn-beasts.
But what though? Courage. As horns are odious,
they are necessary. It is said "Many a man knows no
end of his goods." Right: many a man has good
horns and knows no end of them. Well, that is the
dowry of his wife; 'tis none of his own getting.
Horns? Even so. Poor men alone? No, no. The
noblest deer hath them as huge as the rascal. Is the
single man therefore blessed? No. As a walled town
is more worthier than a village, so is the forehead of
a married man more honorable than the bare brow
of a bachelor. And by how much defense is better
than no skill, by so much is a horn more precious
than to want.

[Enter Sir Oliver Martext.]

Here comes Sir Oliver.--Sir Oliver Martext, you are
well met. Will you dispatch us here under this tree,
or shall we go with you to your chapel?

OLIVER MARTEXT  Is there none here to give the
woman?

TOUCHSTONE  I will not take her on gift of any man.

OLIVER MARTEXT  Truly, she must be given, or the
marriage is not lawful.

JAQUES, [coming forward]  Proceed, proceed. I'll give
her.

TOUCHSTONE  Good even, good Monsieur What-you-call-'t.
How do you, sir? You are very well met. God
'ild you for your last company. I am very glad to see
you. Even a toy in hand here, sir. Nay, pray be
covered.

JAQUES  Will you be married, motley?

TOUCHSTONE  As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his
curb, and the falcon her bells, so man hath his
desires; and as pigeons bill, so wedlock would be
nibbling.

JAQUES  And will you, being a man of your breeding, be
married under a bush like a beggar? Get you to
church, and have a good priest that can tell you
what marriage is. This fellow will but join you
together as they join wainscot. Then one of you will
prove a shrunk panel and, like green timber, warp,
warp.

TOUCHSTONE  I am not in the mind but I were better to
be married of him than of another, for he is not like
to marry me well, and not being well married, it
will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my
wife.

JAQUES  Go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.

TOUCHSTONE  Come, sweet Audrey. We must be married,
or we must live in bawdry.--Farewell, good
Master Oliver, not
	      O sweet Oliver,
	      O brave Oliver,
	   Leave me not behind thee,
But
	      Wind away,
	      Begone, I say,
	   I will not to wedding with thee.
[Audrey, Touchstone, and Jaques exit.]

OLIVER MARTEXT  'Tis no matter. Ne'er a fantastical
knave of them all shall flout me out of my calling.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Rosalind, dressed as Ganymede, and Celia,
dressed as Aliena.]


ROSALIND  Never talk to me. I will weep.

CELIA  Do, I prithee, but yet have the grace to consider
that tears do not become a man.

ROSALIND  But have I not cause to weep?

CELIA  As good cause as one would desire. Therefore
weep.

ROSALIND  His very hair is of the dissembling color.

CELIA  Something browner than Judas's. Marry, his
kisses are Judas's own children.

ROSALIND  I' faith, his hair is of a good color.

CELIA  An excellent color. Your chestnut was ever the
only color.

ROSALIND  And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the
touch of holy bread.

CELIA  He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana. A
nun of winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously.
The very ice of chastity is in them.

ROSALIND  But why did he swear he would come this
morning, and comes not?

CELIA  Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.

ROSALIND  Do you think so?

CELIA  Yes, I think he is not a pickpurse nor a horse-stealer,
but for his verity in love, I do think him as
concave as a covered goblet or a worm-eaten nut.

ROSALIND  Not true in love?

CELIA  Yes, when he is in, but I think he is not in.

ROSALIND  You have heard him swear downright he
was.

CELIA  "Was" is not "is." Besides, the oath of a lover is
no stronger than the word of a tapster. They are
both the confirmer of false reckonings. He attends
here in the forest on the Duke your father.

ROSALIND  I met the Duke yesterday and had much
question with him. He asked me of what parentage
I was. I told him, of as good as he. So he laughed
and let me go. But what talk we of fathers when
there is such a man as Orlando?

CELIA  O, that's a brave man. He writes brave verses,
speaks brave words, swears brave oaths, and breaks
them bravely, quite traverse, athwart the heart of
his lover, as a puny tilter that spurs his horse but on
one side breaks his staff like a noble goose; but all's
brave that youth mounts and folly guides.

[Enter Corin.]

Who comes here?

CORIN
Mistress and master, you have oft inquired
After the shepherd that complained of love,
Who you saw sitting by me on the turf,
Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
That was his mistress.

CELIA, [as Aliena]  Well, and what of him?

CORIN
If you will see a pageant truly played
Between the pale complexion of true love
And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
Go hence a little, and I shall conduct you
If you will mark it.

ROSALIND, [aside to Celia]  O come, let us remove.
The sight of lovers feedeth those in love.
[As Ganymede, to Corin.] 
Bring us to this sight, andyou shall say
I'll prove a busy actor in their play.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Silvius and Phoebe.]


SILVIUS
Sweet Phoebe, do not scorn me. Do not, Phoebe.
Say that you love me not, but say not so
In bitterness. The common executioner,
Whose heart th' accustomed sight of death makes
hard,
Falls not the axe upon the humbled neck
But first begs pardon. Will you sterner be
Than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?

[Enter, unobserved, Rosalind as Ganymede, Celia as
Aliena, and Corin.]


PHOEBE
I would not be thy executioner.
I fly thee, for I would not injure thee.
Thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye.
'Tis pretty, sure, and very probable
That eyes, that are the frail'st and softest things,
Who shut their coward gates on atomies,
Should be called tyrants, butchers, murderers.
Now I do frown on thee with all my heart,
And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee.
Now counterfeit to swoon; why, now fall down;
Or if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,
Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers.
Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee.
Scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains
Some scar of it. Lean upon a rush,
The cicatrice and capable impressure
Thy palm some moment keeps. But now mine eyes,
Which I have darted at thee, hurt thee not;
Nor I am sure there is no force in eyes
That can do hurt.

SILVIUS  O dear Phoebe,
If ever--as that ever may be near--
You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy,
Then shall you know the wounds invisible
That love's keen arrows make.

PHOEBE  But till that time
Come not thou near me. And when that time
comes,
Afflict me with thy mocks, pity me not,
As till that time I shall not pity thee.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede, coming forward]
And why, I pray you? Who might be your mother,
That you insult, exult, and all at once,
Over the wretched? What though you have no
beauty--
As, by my faith, I see no more in you
Than without candle may go dark to bed--
Must you be therefore proud and pitiless?
Why, what means this? Why do you look on me?
I see no more in you than in the ordinary
Of nature's sale-work.--'Od's my little life,
I think she means to tangle my eyes, too.--
No, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it.
'Tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
Your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream
That can entame my spirits to your worship.--
You foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her,
Like foggy south puffing with wind and rain?
You are a thousand times a properer man
Than she a woman. 'Tis such fools as you
That makes the world full of ill-favored children.
'Tis not her glass but you that flatters her,
And out of you she sees herself more proper
Than any of her lineaments can show her.--
But, mistress, know yourself. Down on your knees
And thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love,
For I must tell you friendly in your ear,
Sell when you can; you are not for all markets.
Cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer.
Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer.--
So take her to thee, shepherd. Fare you well.

PHOEBE
Sweet youth, I pray you chide a year together.
I had rather hear you chide than this man woo.

ROSALIND[,as Ganymede]  He's fall'n in love with your
foulness. [(To Silvius.)] And she'll fall in love with
my anger. If it be so, as fast as she answers thee with
frowning looks, I'll sauce her with bitter words. [(To
Phoebe.)] Why look you so upon me?

PHOEBE  For no ill will I bear you.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]
I pray you, do not fall in love with me,
For I am falser than vows made in wine.
Besides, I like you not. If you will know my house,
'Tis at the tuft of olives, here hard by.--
Will you go, sister?--Shepherd, ply her hard.--
Come, sister.--Shepherdess, look on him better,
And be not proud. Though all the world could see,
None could be so abused in sight as he.--
Come, to our flock.
[She exits, with Celia and Corin.]

PHOEBE, [aside]
Dead shepherd, now I find thy saw of might:
"Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?"

SILVIUS
Sweet Phoebe--

PHOEBE  Ha, what sayst thou, Silvius?

SILVIUS  Sweet Phoebe, pity me.

PHOEBE
Why, I am sorry for thee, gentle Silvius.

SILVIUS
Wherever sorrow is, relief would be.
If you do sorrow at my grief in love,
By giving love your sorrow and my grief
Were both extermined.

PHOEBE
Thou hast my love. Is not that neighborly?

SILVIUS
I would have you.

PHOEBE  Why, that were covetousness.
Silvius, the time was that I hated thee;
And yet it is not that I bear thee love;
But since that thou canst talk of love so well,
Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
I will endure, and I'll employ thee too.
But do not look for further recompense
Than thine own gladness that thou art employed.

SILVIUS
So holy and so perfect is my love,
And I in such a poverty of grace,
That I shall think it a most plenteous crop
To glean the broken ears after the man
That the main harvest reaps. Loose now and then
A scattered smile, and that I'll live upon.

PHOEBE
Know'st thou the youth that spoke to me erewhile?

SILVIUS
Not very well, but I have met him oft,
And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds
That the old carlot once was master of.

PHOEBE
Think not I love him, though I ask for him.
'Tis but a peevish boy--yet he talks well--
But what care I for words? Yet words do well
When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.
It is a pretty youth--not very pretty--
But sure he's proud--and yet his pride becomes
him.
He'll make a proper man. The best thing in him
Is his complexion; and faster than his tongue
Did make offense, his eye did heal it up.
He is not very tall--yet for his years he's tall.
His leg is but so-so--and yet 'tis well.
There was a pretty redness in his lip,
A little riper and more lusty red
Than that mixed in his cheek: 'twas just the
difference
Betwixt the constant red and mingled damask.
There be some women, Silvius, had they marked
him
In parcels as I did, would have gone near
To fall in love with him; but for my part
I love him not nor hate him not; and yet
I have more cause to hate him than to love him.
For what had he to do to chide at me?
He said mine eyes were black and my hair black,
And now I am remembered, scorned at me.
I marvel why I answered not again.
But that's all one: omittance is no quittance.
I'll write to him a very taunting letter,
And thou shalt bear it. Wilt thou, Silvius?

SILVIUS
Phoebe, with all my heart.

PHOEBE  I'll write it straight.
The matter's in my head and in my heart.
I will be bitter with him and passing short.
Go with me, Silvius.
[They exit.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Rosalind as Ganymede, and Celia as Aliena,
and Jaques.]


JAQUES  I prithee, pretty youth, let me be better
acquainted with thee.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  They say you are a melancholy
fellow.

JAQUES  I am so. I do love it better than laughing.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Those that are in extremity
of either are abominable fellows and betray
themselves to every modern censure worse than
drunkards.

JAQUES  Why, 'tis good to be sad and say nothing.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Why then, 'tis good to be a
post.

JAQUES  I have neither the scholar's melancholy, which
is emulation; nor the musician's, which is fantastical;
nor the courtier's, which is proud; nor the
soldier's, which is ambitious; nor the lawyer's,
which is politic; nor the lady's, which is nice; nor
the lover's, which is all these; but it is a melancholy
of mine own, compounded of many simples, extracted
from many objects, and indeed the sundry
contemplation of my travels, in which my often
rumination wraps me in a most humorous sadness.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  A traveller. By my faith, you
have great reason to be sad. I fear you have sold
your own lands to see other men's. Then to have
seen much and to have nothing is to have rich eyes
and poor hands.

JAQUES  Yes, I have gained my experience.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  And your experience makes
you sad. I had rather have a fool to make me merry
than experience to make me sad--and to travel for
it too.

[Enter Orlando.]


ORLANDO
Good day and happiness, dear Rosalind.

JAQUES  Nay then, God be wi' you, an you talk in blank
verse.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Farewell, Monsieur Traveller.
Look you lisp and wear strange suits, disable all
the benefits of your own country, be out of love with
your nativity, and almost chide God for making you
that countenance you are, or I will scarce think you
have swam in a gondola.
[Jaques exits.]
Why, how now, Orlando, where have you been all
this while? You a lover? An you serve me such
another trick, never come in my sight more.

ORLANDO  My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of
my promise.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Break an hour's promise in
love? He that will divide a minute into a thousand
parts and break but a part of the thousand part of a
minute in the affairs of love, it may be said of him
that Cupid hath clapped him o' th' shoulder, but I'll
warrant him heart-whole.

ORLANDO  Pardon me, dear Rosalind.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Nay, an you be so tardy,
come no more in my sight. I had as lief be wooed of
a snail.

ORLANDO  Of a snail?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Ay, of a snail, for though he
comes slowly, he carries his house on his head--a
better jointure, I think, than you make a woman.
Besides, he brings his destiny with him.

ORLANDO  What's that?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Why, horns, which such as
you are fain to be beholding to your wives for. But
he comes armed in his fortune and prevents the
slander of his wife.

ORLANDO  Virtue is no hornmaker, and my Rosalind is
virtuous.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  And I am your Rosalind.

CELIA, [as Aliena]  It pleases him to call you so, but he
hath a Rosalind of a better leer than you.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede, to Orlando]  Come, woo me,
woo me, for now I am in a holiday humor, and like
enough to consent. What would you say to me now
an I were your very, very Rosalind?

ORLANDO  I would kiss before I spoke.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Nay, you were better speak
first, and when you were gravelled for lack of
matter, you might take occasion to kiss. Very good
orators, when they are out, they will spit; and for
lovers lacking--God warn us--matter, the cleanliest
shift is to kiss.

ORLANDO  How if the kiss be denied?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Then she puts you to entreaty,
and there begins new matter.

ORLANDO  Who could be out, being before his beloved
mistress?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Marry, that should you if I
were your mistress, or I should think my honesty
ranker than my wit.

ORLANDO  What, of my suit?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Not out of your apparel, and
yet out of your suit. Am not I your Rosalind?

ORLANDO  I take some joy to say you are because I
would be talking of her.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Well, in her person I say I
will not have you.

ORLANDO  Then, in mine own person I die.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  No, faith, die by attorney.
The poor world is almost six thousand years old,
and in all this time there was not any man died in
his own person, videlicet, in a love cause. Troilus
had his brains dashed out with a Grecian club, yet
he did what he could to die before, and he is one of
the patterns of love. Leander, he would have lived
many a fair year though Hero had turned nun, if it
had not been for a hot midsummer night, for, good
youth, he went but forth to wash him in the Hellespont
and, being taken with the cramp, was
drowned; and the foolish chroniclers of that age
found it was Hero of Sestos. But these are all lies.
Men have died from time to time and worms have
eaten them, but not for love.

ORLANDO  I would not have my right Rosalind of this
mind, for I protest her frown might kill me.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  By this hand, it will not kill a
fly. But come; now I will be your Rosalind in a more
coming-on disposition, and ask me what you will, I
will grant it.

ORLANDO  Then love me, Rosalind.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Yes, faith, will I, Fridays and
Saturdays and all.

ORLANDO  And wilt thou have me?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Ay, and twenty such.

ORLANDO  What sayest thou?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Are you not good?

ORLANDO  I hope so.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Why then, can one desire
too much of a good thing?--Come, sister, you shall
be the priest and marry us.--Give me your hand,
Orlando.--What do you say, sister?

ORLANDO, [to Celia]  Pray thee marry us.

CELIA, [as Aliena]  I cannot say the words.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  You must begin "Will you,
Orlando--"

CELIA, [as Aliena]  Go to.--Will you, Orlando, have to
wife this Rosalind?

ORLANDO  I will.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Ay, but when?

ORLANDO  Why now, as fast as she can marry us.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Then you must say "I take
thee, Rosalind, for wife."

ORLANDO  I take thee, Rosalind, for wife.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  I might ask you for your
commission, but I do take thee, Orlando, for my
husband. There's a girl goes before the priest, and
certainly a woman's thought runs before her
actions.

ORLANDO  So do all thoughts. They are winged.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Now tell me how long you
would have her after you have possessed her?

ORLANDO  Forever and a day.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Say "a day" without the
"ever." No, no, Orlando, men are April when they
woo, December when they wed. Maids are May
when they are maids, but the sky changes when
they are wives. I will be more jealous of thee than a
Barbary cock-pigeon over his hen, more clamorous
than a parrot against rain, more newfangled than
an ape, more giddy in my desires than a monkey. I
will weep for nothing, like Diana in the fountain,
and I will do that when you are disposed to be
merry. I will laugh like a hyena, and that when thou
art inclined to sleep.

ORLANDO  But will my Rosalind do so?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  By my life, she will do as I
do.

ORLANDO  O, but she is wise.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Or else she could not have
the wit to do this. The wiser, the waywarder. Make
the doors upon a woman's wit, and it will out at the
casement. Shut that, and 'twill out at the keyhole.
Stop that, 'twill fly with the smoke out at the
chimney.

ORLANDO  A man that had a wife with such a wit, he
might say "Wit, whither wilt?"

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Nay, you might keep that
check for it till you met your wife's wit going to
your neighbor's bed.

ORLANDO  And what wit could wit have to excuse that?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Marry, to say she came to
seek you there. You shall never take her without her
answer unless you take her without her tongue. O,
that woman that cannot make her fault her husband's
occasion, let her never nurse her child
herself, for she will breed it like a fool.

ORLANDO  For these two hours, Rosalind, I will leave
thee.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Alas, dear love, I cannot lack
thee two hours.

ORLANDO  I must attend the Duke at dinner. By two
o'clock I will be with thee again.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Ay, go your ways, go your
ways. I knew what you would prove. My friends told
me as much, and I thought no less. That flattering
tongue of yours won me. 'Tis but one cast away, and
so, come, death. Two o'clock is your hour?

ORLANDO  Ay, sweet Rosalind.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  By my troth, and in good
earnest, and so God mend me, and by all pretty
oaths that are not dangerous, if you break one jot of
your promise or come one minute behind your
hour, I will think you the most pathetical break-promise,
and the most hollow lover, and the most
unworthy of her you call Rosalind that may be
chosen out of the gross band of the unfaithful.
Therefore beware my censure, and keep your
promise.

ORLANDO  With no less religion than if thou wert indeed
my Rosalind. So, adieu.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Well, time is the old justice
that examines all such offenders, and let time try.
Adieu.
[Orlando exits.]

CELIA  You have simply misused our sex in your love-prate.
We must have your doublet and hose plucked
over your head and show the world what the bird
hath done to her own nest.

ROSALIND  O coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou
didst know how many fathom deep I am in love. But
it cannot be sounded; my affection hath an
unknown bottom, like the Bay of Portugal.

CELIA  Or rather bottomless, that as fast as you pour
affection in, it runs out.

ROSALIND  No, that same wicked bastard of Venus, that
was begot of thought, conceived of spleen, and born
of madness, that blind rascally boy that abuses
everyone's eyes because his own are out, let him be
judge how deep I am in love. I'll tell thee, Aliena, I
cannot be out of the sight of Orlando. I'll go find a
shadow and sigh till he come.

CELIA  And I'll sleep.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Jaques and Lords, like foresters.]


JAQUES  Which is he that killed the deer?

FIRST LORD  Sir, it was I.

JAQUES, [to the other Lords]  Let's present him to the
Duke like a Roman conqueror. And it would do well
to set the deer's horns upon his head for a branch of
victory.--Have you no song, forester, for this
purpose?

SECOND LORD  Yes, sir.

JAQUES  Sing it. 'Tis no matter how it be in tune, so it
make noise enough.

Music. Song.


SECOND LORD [sings]
	What shall he have that killed the deer?
	His leather skin and horns to wear.
	   Then sing him home.

[The rest shall bear this burden:]


	Take thou no scorn to wear the horn.
	It was a crest ere thou wast born.
	   Thy father's father wore it,
	   And thy father bore it.
	The horn, the horn, the lusty horn
	Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Rosalind dressed as Ganymede and Celia
dressed as Aliena.]


ROSALIND  How say you now? Is it not past two o'clock?
And here much Orlando.

CELIA  I warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain
he hath ta'en his bow and arrows and is gone forth
to sleep.

[Enter Silvius.]

Look who comes here.

SILVIUS, [to Rosalind]
My errand is to you, fair youth.
My gentle Phoebe did bid me give you this.
[He gives Rosalind a paper.]
I know not the contents, but as I guess
By the stern brow and waspish action
Which she did use as she was writing of it,
It bears an angry tenor. Pardon me.
I am but as a guiltless messenger.
[Rosalind reads the letter.]

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]
Patience herself would startle at this letter
And play the swaggerer. Bear this, bear all.
She says I am not fair, that I lack manners.
She calls me proud, and that she could not love me
Were man as rare as phoenix. 'Od's my will,
Her love is not the hare that I do hunt.
Why writes she so to me? Well, shepherd, well,
This is a letter of your own device.

SILVIUS
No, I protest. I know not the contents.
Phoebe did write it.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Come, come, you are a
fool,
And turned into the extremity of love.
I saw her hand. She has a leathern hand,
A freestone-colored hand. I verily did think
That her old gloves were on, but 'twas her hands.
She has a huswife's hand--but that's no matter.
I say she never did invent this letter.
This is a man's invention, and his hand.

SILVIUS  Sure it is hers.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]
Why, 'tis a boisterous and a cruel style,
A style for challengers. Why, she defies me
Like Turk to Christian. Women's gentle brain
Could not drop forth such giant-rude invention,
Such Ethiop words, blacker in their effect
Than in their countenance. Will you hear the letter?

SILVIUS
So please you, for I never heard it yet,
Yet heard too much of Phoebe's cruelty.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]
She Phoebes me. Mark how the tyrant writes.
[Read.]
	Art thou god to shepherd turned,
	That a maiden's heart hath burned?
Can a woman rail thus?

SILVIUS  Call you this railing?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]
[Read.]
	Why, thy godhead laid apart,
	Warr'st thou with a woman's heart?
Did you ever hear such railing?
	Whiles the eye of man did woo me,
	That could do no vengeance to me.
Meaning me a beast.
	If the scorn of your bright eyne
	Have power to raise such love in mine,
	Alack, in me what strange effect
	Would they work in mild aspect?
	Whiles you chid me, I did love.
	How then might your prayers move?
	He that brings this love to thee
	Little knows this love in me,
	And by him seal up thy mind
	Whether that thy youth and kind
	Will the faithful offer take
	Of me, and all that I can make,
	Or else by him my love deny,
	And then I'll study how to die.

SILVIUS  Call you this chiding?

CELIA, [as Aliena]  Alas, poor shepherd.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Do you pity him? No, he
deserves no pity.--Wilt thou love such a woman?
What, to make thee an instrument and play false
strains upon thee? Not to be endured. Well, go your
way to her, for I see love hath made thee a tame
snake, and say this to her: that if she love me, I
charge her to love thee; if she will not, I will never
have her unless thou entreat for her. If you be a true
lover, hence, and not a word, for here comes more
company.	[Silvius exits.]

[Enter Oliver.]


OLIVER
Good morrow, fair ones. Pray you, if you know,
Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
A sheepcote fenced about with olive trees?

CELIA, [as Aliena]
West of this place, down in the neighbor bottom;
The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
Left on your right hand brings you to the place.
But at this hour the house doth keep itself.
There's none within.

OLIVER
If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
Then should I know you by description--
Such garments, and such years. "The boy is fair,
Of female favor, and bestows himself
Like a ripe sister; the woman low
And browner than her brother." Are not you
The owner of the house I did inquire for?

CELIA, [as Aliena]
It is no boast, being asked, to say we are.

OLIVER
Orlando doth commend him to you both,
And to that youth he calls his Rosalind
He sends this bloody napkin. Are you he?
[He shows a stained handkerchief.]

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]
I am. What must we understand by this?

OLIVER
Some of my shame, if you will know of me
What man I am, and how, and why, and where
This handkercher was stained.

CELIA, [as Aliena]  I pray you tell it.

OLIVER
When last the young Orlando parted from you,
He left a promise to return again
Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,
Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
Lo, what befell. He threw his eye aside--
And mark what object did present itself:
Under an old oak, whose boughs were mossed with
age
And high top bald with dry antiquity,
A wretched, ragged man, o'ergrown with hair,
Lay sleeping on his back. About his neck
A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself,
Who with her head, nimble in threats, approached
The opening of his mouth. But suddenly,
Seeing Orlando, it unlinked itself
And, with indented glides, did slip away
Into a bush, under which bush's shade
A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch
When that the sleeping man should stir--for 'tis
The royal disposition of that beast
To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead.
This seen, Orlando did approach the man
And found it was his brother, his elder brother.

CELIA, [as Aliena]
O, I have heard him speak of that same brother,
And he did render him the most unnatural
That lived amongst men.

OLIVER  And well he might so do,
For well I know he was unnatural.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]
But to Orlando: did he leave him there,
Food to the sucked and hungry lioness?

OLIVER
Twice did he turn his back and purposed so,
But kindness, nobler ever than revenge,
And nature, stronger than his just occasion,
Made him give battle to the lioness,
Who quickly fell before him; in which hurtling,
From miserable slumber I awaked.

CELIA, [as Aliena]  Are you his brother?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Was 't you he rescued?

CELIA, [as Aliena]
Was 't you that did so oft contrive to kill him?

OLIVER
'Twas I, but 'tis not I. I do not shame
To tell you what I was, since my conversion
So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]
But for the bloody napkin?

OLIVER  By and by.
When from the first to last betwixt us two
Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed--
As how I came into that desert place--
In brief, he led me to the gentle duke,
Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,
Committing me unto my brother's love;
Who led me instantly unto his cave,
There stripped himself, and here upon his arm
The lioness had torn some flesh away,
Which all this while had bled; and now he fainted,
And cried in fainting upon Rosalind.
Brief, I recovered him, bound up his wound,
And after some small space, being strong at heart,
He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
To tell this story, that you might excuse
His broken promise, and to give this napkin
Dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth
That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.
[Rosalind faints.]

CELIA, [as Aliena]
Why, how now, Ganymede, sweet Ganymede?

OLIVER
Many will swoon when they do look on blood.

CELIA, [as Aliena]
There is more in it.--Cousin Ganymede.

OLIVER  Look, he recovers.

ROSALIND  I would I were at home.

CELIA, [as Aliena]  We'll lead you thither.--I pray you,
will you take him by the arm?

OLIVER, [helping Rosalind to rise]  Be of good cheer,
youth. You a man? You lack a man's heart.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  I do so, I confess it. Ah,
sirrah, a body would think this was well-counterfeited.
I pray you tell your brother how well I
counterfeited. Heigh-ho.

OLIVER  This was not counterfeit. There is too great
testimony in your complexion that it was a passion
of earnest.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Counterfeit, I assure you.

OLIVER  Well then, take a good heart, and counterfeit to
be a man.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  So I do; but, i' faith, I should
have been a woman by right.

CELIA, [as Aliena]  Come, you look paler and paler. Pray
you draw homewards.--Good sir, go with us.

OLIVER
That will I, for I must bear answer back
How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  I shall devise something.
But I pray you commend my counterfeiting to him.
Will you go?
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Touchstone and Audrey.]


TOUCHSTONE  We shall find a time, Audrey. Patience,
gentle Audrey.

AUDREY  Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the
old gentleman's saying.

TOUCHSTONE  A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most
vile Martext. But Audrey, there is a youth here in
the forest lays claim to you.

AUDREY  Ay, I know who 'tis. He hath no interest in me
in the world.

[Enter William.]

Here comes the man you mean.

TOUCHSTONE  It is meat and drink to me to see a clown.
By my troth, we that have good wits have much to
answer for. We shall be flouting. We cannot hold.

WILLIAM  Good ev'n, Audrey.

AUDREY  God gi' good ev'n, William.

WILLIAM, [to Touchstone]  And good ev'n to you, sir.

TOUCHSTONE  Good ev'n, gentle friend. Cover thy head,
cover thy head. Nay, prithee, be covered. How old
are you, friend?

WILLIAM  Five-and-twenty, sir.

TOUCHSTONE  A ripe age. Is thy name William?

WILLIAM  William, sir.

TOUCHSTONE  A fair name. Wast born i' th' forest here?

WILLIAM  Ay, sir, I thank God.

TOUCHSTONE  "Thank God." A good answer. Art rich?

WILLIAM  'Faith sir, so-so.

TOUCHSTONE  "So-so" is good, very good, very excellent
good. And yet it is not: it is but so-so. Art thou wise?

WILLIAM  Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.

TOUCHSTONE  Why, thou sayst well. I do now remember
a saying: "The fool doth think he is wise, but the
wise man knows himself to be a fool." The heathen
philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape,
would open his lips when he put it into his mouth,
meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and
lips to open. You do love this maid?

WILLIAM  I do, sir.

TOUCHSTONE  Give me your hand. Art thou learned?

WILLIAM  No, sir.

TOUCHSTONE  Then learn this of me: to have is to have.
For it is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured
out of a cup into a glass, by filling the one doth
empty the other. For all your writers do consent
that ipse is "he." Now, you are not ipse, for I am he.

WILLIAM  Which he, sir?

TOUCHSTONE  He, sir, that must marry this woman.
Therefore, you clown, abandon--which is in the
vulgar "leave"--the society--which in the boorish
is "company"--of this female--which in the common
is "woman"; which together is, abandon the
society of this female, or, clown, thou perishest; or,
to thy better understanding, diest; or, to wit, I kill
thee, make thee away, translate thy life into death,
thy liberty into bondage. I will deal in poison with
thee, or in bastinado, or in steel. I will bandy with
thee in faction. I will o'errun thee with policy. I
will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways. Therefore
tremble and depart.

AUDREY  Do, good William.

WILLIAM, [to Touchstone]  God rest you merry, sir.
[He exits.]

[Enter Corin.]


CORIN  Our master and mistress seeks you. Come away,
away.

TOUCHSTONE  Trip, Audrey, trip, Audrey.--I attend, I
attend.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Orlando, with his arm in a sling, and Oliver.]


ORLANDO  Is 't possible that on so little acquaintance
you should like her? That, but seeing, you should
love her? And loving, woo? And wooing, she should
grant? And will you persever to enjoy her?

OLIVER  Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the
poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden
wooing, nor her sudden consenting, but say with
me "I love Aliena"; say with her that she loves me;
consent with both that we may enjoy each other. It
shall be to your good, for my father's house and all
the revenue that was old Sir Rowland's will I estate
upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.

[Enter Rosalind, as Ganymede.]


ORLANDO  You have my consent. Let your wedding be
tomorrow. Thither will I invite the Duke and all 's
contented followers. Go you and prepare Aliena,
for, look you, here comes my Rosalind.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede, to Oliver]  God save you,
brother.

OLIVER  And you, fair sister.	[He exits.]

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  O my dear Orlando, how it
grieves me to see thee wear thy heart in a scarf.

ORLANDO  It is my arm.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  I thought thy heart had been
wounded with the claws of a lion.

ORLANDO  Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Did your brother tell you
how I counterfeited to swoon when he showed me
your handkercher?

ORLANDO  Ay, and greater wonders than that.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  O, I know where you are.
Nay, 'tis true. There was never anything so sudden
but the fight of two rams, and Caesar's thrasonical
brag of "I came, saw, and overcame." For your
brother and my sister no sooner met but they
looked, no sooner looked but they loved, no sooner
loved but they sighed, no sooner sighed but they
asked one another the reason, no sooner knew the
reason but they sought the remedy; and in these
degrees have they made a pair of stairs to marriage,
which they will climb incontinent, or else be incontinent
before marriage. They are in the very wrath
of love, and they will together. Clubs cannot part
them.

ORLANDO  They shall be married tomorrow, and I will
bid the Duke to the nuptial. But O, how bitter a
thing it is to look into happiness through another
man's eyes. By so much the more shall I tomorrow
be at the height of heart-heaviness by how much I
shall think my brother happy in having what he
wishes for.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Why, then, tomorrow I cannot
serve your turn for Rosalind?

ORLANDO  I can live no longer by thinking.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  I will weary you then no
longer with idle talking. Know of me then--for
now I speak to some purpose--that I know you are
a gentleman of good conceit. I speak not this that
you should bear a good opinion of my knowledge,
insomuch I say I know you are. Neither do I labor
for a greater esteem than may in some little measure
draw a belief from you to do yourself good, and
not to grace me. Believe then, if you please, that I
can do strange things. I have, since I was three year
old, conversed with a magician, most profound in
his art and yet not damnable. If you do love Rosalind
so near the heart as your gesture cries it out,
when your brother marries Aliena shall you marry
her. I know into what straits of fortune she is
driven, and it is not impossible to me, if it appear
not inconvenient to you, to set her before your eyes
tomorrow, human as she is, and without any
danger.

ORLANDO  Speak'st thou in sober meanings?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  By my life I do, which I
tender dearly, though I say I am a magician. Therefore
put you in your best array, bid your friends; for
if you will be married tomorrow, you shall, and to
Rosalind, if you will.

[Enter Silvius and Phoebe.]

Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of
hers.

PHOEBE, [to Rosalind]
Youth, you have done me much ungentleness
To show the letter that I writ to you.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]
I care not if I have. It is my study
To seem despiteful and ungentle to you.
You are there followed by a faithful shepherd.
Look upon him, love him; he worships you.

PHOEBE, [to Silvius]
Good shepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to love.

SILVIUS
It is to be all made of sighs and tears,
And so am I for Phoebe.

PHOEBE  And I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO  And I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  And I for no woman.

SILVIUS
It is to be all made of faith and service,
And so am I for Phoebe.

PHOEBE  And I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO  And I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  And I for no woman.

SILVIUS
It is to be all made of fantasy,
All made of passion and all made of wishes,
All adoration, duty, and observance,
All humbleness, all patience and impatience,
All purity, all trial, all observance,
And so am I for Phoebe.

PHOEBE  And so am I for Ganymede.

ORLANDO  And so am I for Rosalind.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  And so am I for no
woman.

PHOEBE
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

SILVIUS
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

ORLANDO
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Why do you speak too,
"Why blame you me to love you?"

ORLANDO  To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]  Pray you, no more of this.
'Tis like the howling of Irish wolves against the
moon. [(To Silvius.)] I will help you if I can. [(To
Phoebe.)] I would love you if I could.--Tomorrow
meet me all together. [(To Phoebe.)] I will marry
you if ever I marry woman, and I'll be married
tomorrow. [(To Orlando.)] I will satisfy you if ever I
satisfy man, and you shall be married tomorrow.
[(To Silvius.)] I will content you, if what pleases you
contents you, and you shall be married tomorrow.
[(To Orlando.)] As you love Rosalind, meet. [(To
Silvius.)] As you love Phoebe, meet.--And as I love
no woman, I'll meet. So fare you well. I have left
you commands.

SILVIUS  I'll not fail, if I live.

PHOEBE  Nor I.

ORLANDO  Nor I.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Touchstone and Audrey.]


TOUCHSTONE  Tomorrow is the joyful day, Audrey. Tomorrow
will we be married.

AUDREY  I do desire it with all my heart, and I hope it is
no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the
world.

[Enter two Pages.]

Here come two of the banished duke's pages.

FIRST PAGE  Well met, honest gentleman.

TOUCHSTONE  By my troth, well met. Come, sit, sit, and
a song.

SECOND PAGE  We are for you. Sit i' th' middle.
[They sit.]

FIRST PAGE  Shall we clap into 't roundly, without
hawking or spitting or saying we are hoarse, which
are the only prologues to a bad voice?

SECOND PAGE  I' faith, i' faith, and both in a tune like
two gypsies on a horse.

Song.


PAGES [sing]
	It was a lover and his lass,
	   With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no,
	That o'er the green cornfield did pass
	   In springtime, the only pretty ring time,
	When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
	Sweet lovers love the spring.

	Between the acres of the rye,
	   With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no,
	These pretty country folks would lie
	   In springtime, the only pretty ring time,
	When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
	Sweet lovers love the spring.

	This carol they began that hour,
	   With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no,
	How that a life was but a flower
	   In springtime, the only pretty ring time,
	When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
	Sweet lovers love the spring.

	And therefore take the present time,
	   With a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no,
	For love is crowned with the prime,
	   In springtime, the only pretty ring time,
	When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding.
	Sweet lovers love the spring.

TOUCHSTONE  Truly, young gentlemen, though there
was no great matter in the ditty, yet the note was
very untunable.

FIRST PAGE  You are deceived, sir. We kept time. We lost
not our time.

TOUCHSTONE  By my troth, yes. I count it but time lost
to hear such a foolish song. God be wi' you, and
God mend your voices.--Come, Audrey.
[They rise and exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Duke Senior, Amiens, Jaques, Orlando, Oliver,
and Celia as Aliena.]


DUKE SENIOR
Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
Can do all this that he hath promised?

ORLANDO
I sometimes do believe and sometimes do not,
As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.

[Enter Rosalind as Ganymede, Silvius, and Phoebe.]


ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]
Patience once more whiles our compact is urged.
[To Duke.] You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,
You will bestow her on Orlando here?

DUKE SENIOR
That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede, to Orlando]
And you say you will have her when I bring her?

ORLANDO
That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede, to Phoebe]
You say you'll marry me if I be willing?

PHOEBE
That will I, should I die the hour after.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]
But if you do refuse to marry me,
You'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?

PHOEBE  So is the bargain.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede, to Silvius]
You say that you'll have Phoebe if she will?

SILVIUS
Though to have her and death were both one thing.

ROSALIND, [as Ganymede]
I have promised to make all this matter even.
Keep you your word, O duke, to give your
daughter,--
You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter.--
Keep you your word, Phoebe, that you'll marry me,
Or else, refusing me, to wed this shepherd.--
Keep your word, Silvius, that you'll marry her
If she refuse me. And from hence I go
To make these doubts all even.
[Rosalind and Celia exit.]

DUKE SENIOR
I do remember in this shepherd boy
Some lively touches of my daughter's favor.

ORLANDO
My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
Methought he was a brother to your daughter.
But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born
And hath been tutored in the rudiments
Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
Whom he reports to be a great magician
Obscured in the circle of this forest.

[Enter Touchstone and Audrey.]


JAQUES  There is sure another flood toward, and these
couples are coming to the ark. Here comes a pair of
very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called
fools.

TOUCHSTONE  Salutation and greeting to you all.

JAQUES, [to Duke]  Good my lord, bid him welcome.
This is the motley-minded gentleman that I have so
often met in the forest. He hath been a courtier, he
swears.

TOUCHSTONE  If any man doubt that, let him put me to
my purgation. I have trod a measure. I have flattered
a lady. I have been politic with my friend,
smooth with mine enemy. I have undone three
tailors. I have had four quarrels, and like to have
fought one.

JAQUES  And how was that ta'en up?

TOUCHSTONE  Faith, we met and found the quarrel was
upon the seventh cause.

JAQUES  How "seventh cause"?--Good my lord, like
this fellow.

DUKE SENIOR  I like him very well.

TOUCHSTONE  God 'ild you, sir. I desire you of the like. I
press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country
copulatives, to swear and to forswear, according as
marriage binds and blood breaks. A poor virgin, sir,
an ill-favored thing, sir, but mine own. A poor
humor of mine, sir, to take that that no man else
will. Rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a poor
house, as your pearl in your foul oyster.

DUKE SENIOR  By my faith, he is very swift and
sententious.

TOUCHSTONE  According to the fool's bolt, sir, and such
dulcet diseases.

JAQUES  But for the seventh cause. How did you find the
quarrel on the seventh cause?

TOUCHSTONE  Upon a lie seven times removed.--Bear
your body more seeming, Audrey.--As thus, sir: I
did dislike the cut of a certain courtier's beard. He
sent me word if I said his beard was not cut well, he
was in the mind it was. This is called "the retort
courteous." If I sent him word again it was not well
cut, he would send me word he cut it to please
himself. This is called "the quip modest." If again it
was not well cut, he disabled my judgment. This is
called "the reply churlish." If again it was not well
cut, he would answer I spake not true. This is called
"the reproof valiant." If again it was not well cut, he
would say I lie. This is called "the countercheck
quarrelsome," and so to "the lie circumstantial,"
and "the lie direct."

JAQUES  And how oft did you say his beard was not well
cut?

TOUCHSTONE  I durst go no further than the lie circumstantial,
nor he durst not give me the lie direct, and
so we measured swords and parted.

JAQUES  Can you nominate in order now the degrees of
the lie?

TOUCHSTONE  O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book, as
you have books for good manners. I will name you
the degrees: the first, "the retort courteous"; the
second, "the quip modest"; the third, "the reply
churlish"; the fourth, "the reproof valiant"; the
fifth, "the countercheck quarrelsome"; the sixth,
"the lie with circumstance"; the seventh, "the lie
direct." All these you may avoid but the lie direct,
and you may avoid that too with an "if." I knew
when seven justices could not take up a quarrel, but
when the parties were met themselves, one of them
thought but of an "if," as: "If you said so, then I said
so." And they shook hands and swore brothers.
Your "if" is the only peacemaker: much virtue in
"if."

JAQUES, [to Duke]  Is not this a rare fellow, my lord?
He's as good at anything and yet a fool.

DUKE SENIOR  He uses his folly like a stalking-horse,
and under the presentation of that he shoots his wit.

[Enter Hymen, Rosalind, and Celia. Still music.]


HYMEN
	Then is there mirth in heaven
	When earthly things made even
	   Atone together.
	Good duke, receive thy daughter.
	Hymen from heaven brought her,
	   Yea, brought her hither,
	That thou mightst join her hand with his,
	Whose heart within his bosom is.

ROSALIND, [to Duke]
To you I give myself, for I am yours.
[To Orlando.] To you I give myself, for I am yours.

DUKE SENIOR
If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.

ORLANDO
If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.

PHOEBE
If sight and shape be true,
Why then, my love adieu.

ROSALIND, [to Duke]
I'll have no father, if you be not he.
[To Orlando.] I'll have no husband, if you be not he,
[To Phoebe.] Nor ne'er wed woman, if you be not
she.

HYMEN
	Peace, ho! I bar confusion.
	'Tis I must make conclusion
	   Of these most strange events.
	Here's eight that must take hands
	To join in Hymen's bands,
	   If truth holds true contents.
[To Rosalind and Orlando.]
	You and you no cross shall part.
[To Celia and Oliver.]
	You and you are heart in heart.
[To Phoebe.]
	You to his love must accord
	Or have a woman to your lord.
[To Audrey and Touchstone.]
	You and you are sure together
	As the winter to foul weather.
[To All.]
	Whiles a wedlock hymn we sing,
	Feed yourselves with questioning,
	That reason wonder may diminish
	How thus we met, and these things finish.

Song.


	Wedding is great Juno's crown,
	   O blessed bond of board and bed.
	'Tis Hymen peoples every town.
	   High wedlock then be honored.
	Honor, high honor, and renown
	To Hymen, god of every town.


DUKE SENIOR, [to Celia]
O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me,
Even daughter, welcome in no less degree.

PHOEBE, [to Silvius]
I will not eat my word. Now thou art mine,
Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.

[Enter Second Brother, Jaques de Boys.]


SECOND BROTHER
Let me have audience for a word or two.
I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
Addressed a mighty power, which were on foot
In his own conduct, purposely to take
His brother here and put him to the sword;
And to the skirts of this wild wood he came,
Where, meeting with an old religious man,
After some question with him, was converted
Both from his enterprise and from the world,
His crown bequeathing to his banished brother,
And all their lands restored to them again
That were with him exiled. This to be true
I do engage my life.

DUKE SENIOR  Welcome, young man.
Thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers' wedding:
To one his lands withheld, and to the other
A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.--
First, in this forest let us do those ends
That here were well begun and well begot,
And, after, every of this happy number
That have endured shrewd days and nights with us
Shall share the good of our returned fortune
According to the measure of their states.
Meantime, forget this new-fall'n dignity,
And fall into our rustic revelry.--
Play, music.--And you brides and bridegrooms all,
With measure heaped in joy to th' measures fall.

JAQUES, [to Second Brother]
Sir, by your patience: if I heard you rightly,
The Duke hath put on a religious life
And thrown into neglect the pompous court.

SECOND BROTHER  He hath.

JAQUES
To him will I. Out of these convertites
There is much matter to be heard and learned.
[To Duke.] You to your former honor I bequeath;
Your patience and your virtue well deserves it.
[To Orlando.] You to a love that your true faith doth
merit.
[To Oliver.] You to your land, and love, and great
allies.
[To Silvius.] You to a long and well-deserved bed.
[To Touchstone.] And you to wrangling, for thy
loving voyage
Is but for two months victualled.--So to your
pleasures.
I am for other than for dancing measures.

DUKE SENIOR  Stay, Jaques, stay.

JAQUES
To see no pastime, I. What you would have
I'll stay to know at your abandoned cave.	[He exits.]

DUKE SENIOR
Proceed, proceed. We'll begin these rites,
As we do trust they'll end, in true delights.
[Dance. All but Rosalind exit.]

EPILOGUE.
=========

ROSALIND  It is not the fashion to see the lady the
epilogue, but it is no more unhandsome than to see
the lord the prologue. If it be true that good wine
needs no bush, 'tis true that a good play needs no
epilogue. Yet to good wine they do use good bushes,
and good plays prove the better by the help of good
epilogues. What a case am I in then that am neither
a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with you in
the behalf of a good play! I am not furnished like a
beggar; therefore to beg will not become me. My
way is to conjure you, and I'll begin with the
women. I charge you, O women, for the love you
bear to men, to like as much of this play as please
you. And I charge you, O men, for the love you bear
to women--as I perceive by your simpering, none
of you hates them--that between you and the
women the play may please. If I were a woman, I
would kiss as many of you as had beards that
pleased me, complexions that liked me, and breaths
that I defied not. And I am sure as many as have
good beards, or good faces, or sweet breaths will for
my kind offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell.
[She exits.]
Coriolanus
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/coriolanus/
Created on May 11, 2016, from FDT version 0.9.2.1

Characters in the Play
======================
Caius MARTIUS, later Caius Martius CORIOLANUS
VOLUMNIA, his mother
VIRGILIA, his wife
YOUNG MARTIUS, their son
VALERIA, friend to Volumnia and Virgilia
A GENTLEWOMAN, Volumnia's attendant
MENENIUS Agrippa, patrician
COMINIUS, patrician and general
Titus LARTIUS, patrician and military officer
SICINIUS Velutus, tribune
Junius BRUTUS, tribune
Roman SENATORS, PATRICIANS, NOBLES
Roman LIEUTENANT
Roman OFFICERS
Roman AEDILES
Roman HERALD
Roman SOLDIERS
Roman CITIZENS or PLEBEIANS
Roman MESSENGERS
A ROMAN defector, Nicanor
Tullus AUFIDIUS, general of the Volscians
Volscian CONSPIRATORS of his faction
Three of his SERVINGMEN
Volscian SENATORS, LORDS
Volscian LIEUTENANT
Volscian SOLDIERS
Two of the Volscian WATCH
Volscian PEOPLE
A VOLSCIAN spy, Adrian
CITIZEN of Antium
Roman Lords, Gentry, Captains, Lictors, Trumpeters, Drummers, Musicians, Attendants, and Usher


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter a company of mutinous Citizens with staves,
clubs, and other weapons.]


FIRST CITIZEN  Before we proceed any further, hear me
speak.

ALL  Speak, speak!

FIRST CITIZEN  You are all resolved rather to die than to
famish?

ALL  Resolved, resolved!

FIRST CITIZEN  First, you know Caius Martius is chief
enemy to the people.

ALL  We know 't, we know 't!

FIRST CITIZEN  Let us kill him, and we'll have corn at
our own price. Is 't a verdict?

ALL  No more talking on 't; let it be done. Away, away!

SECOND CITIZEN  One word, good citizens.

FIRST CITIZEN  We are accounted poor citizens, the patricians
good. What authority surfeits on would
relieve us. If they would yield us but the superfluity
while it were wholesome, we might guess they
relieved us humanely. But they think we are too
dear. The leanness that afflicts us, the object of our
misery, is as an inventory to particularize their
abundance; our sufferance is a gain to them. Let
us revenge this with our pikes ere we become
rakes; for the gods know I speak this in hunger for
bread, not in thirst for revenge.

SECOND CITIZEN  Would you proceed especially against
Caius Martius?

ALL  Against him first. He's a very dog to the
commonalty.

SECOND CITIZEN  Consider you what services he has
done for his country?

FIRST CITIZEN  Very well, and could be content to give
him good report for 't, but that he pays himself
with being proud.

SECOND CITIZEN  Nay, but speak not maliciously.

FIRST CITIZEN  I say unto you, what he hath done
famously he did it to that end. Though soft-conscienced
men can be content to say it was for
his country, he did it to please his mother and to be
partly proud, which he is, even to the altitude of
his virtue.

SECOND CITIZEN  What he cannot help in his nature you
account a vice in him. You must in no way say he
is covetous.

FIRST CITIZEN  If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations.
He hath faults, with surplus, to tire in
repetition. [(Shouts within.)] What shouts are these?
The other side o' th' city is risen. Why stay we prating
here? To th' Capitol!

ALL  Come, come!

[Enter Menenius Agrippa.]


FIRST CITIZEN  Soft, who comes here?

SECOND CITIZEN  Worthy Menenius Agrippa, one that
hath always loved the people.

FIRST CITIZEN  He's one honest enough. Would all the
rest were so!

MENENIUS
What work 's, my countrymen, in hand? Where go
you
With bats and clubs? The matter? Speak, I pray you.

SECOND CITIZEN  Our business is not unknown to th'
Senate. They have had inkling this fortnight what
we intend to do, which now we'll show 'em in
deeds. They say poor suitors have strong breaths;
they shall know we have strong arms too.

MENENIUS
Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest
neighbors,
Will you undo yourselves?

SECOND CITIZEN
We cannot, sir; we are undone already.

MENENIUS
I tell you, friends, most charitable care
Have the patricians of you. For your wants,
Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well
Strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them
Against the Roman state, whose course will on
The way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs
Of more strong link asunder than can ever
Appear in your impediment. For the dearth,
The gods, not the patricians, make it, and
Your knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack,
You are transported by calamity
Thither where more attends you, and you slander
The helms o' th' state, who care for you like fathers,
When you curse them as enemies.

SECOND CITIZEN  Care for us? True, indeed! They ne'er
cared for us yet. Suffer us to famish, and their
storehouses crammed with grain; make edicts for
usury to support usurers; repeal daily any wholesome
act established against the rich, and provide
more piercing statutes daily to chain up and restrain
the poor. If the wars eat us not up, they will;
and there's all the love they bear us.

MENENIUS
Either you must confess yourselves wondrous
malicious
Or be accused of folly. I shall tell you
A pretty tale. It may be you have heard it,
But since it serves my purpose, I will venture
To stale 't a little more.

SECOND CITIZEN  Well, I'll hear it, sir; yet you must not
think to fob off our disgrace with a tale. But, an 't
please you, deliver.

MENENIUS
There was a time when all the body's members
Rebelled against the belly, thus accused it:
That only like a gulf it did remain
I' th' midst o' th' body, idle and unactive,
Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
Like labor with the rest, where th' other instruments
Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel,
And, mutually participate, did minister
Unto the appetite and affection common
Of the whole body. The belly answered--

SECOND CITIZEN  Well, sir, what answer made the belly?

MENENIUS
Sir, I shall tell you. With a kind of smile,
Which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus--
For, look you, I may make the belly smile
As well as speak--it tauntingly replied
To th' discontented members, the mutinous parts
That envied his receipt; even so most fitly
As you malign our senators for that
They are not such as you.

SECOND CITIZEN  Your belly's answer--what?
The kingly crowned head, the vigilant eye,
The counselor heart, the arm our soldier,
Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter,
With other muniments and petty helps
In this our fabric, if that they--

MENENIUS  What then?
'Fore me, this fellow speaks. What then? What then?

SECOND CITIZEN
Should by the cormorant belly be restrained,
Who is the sink o' th' body--

MENENIUS  Well, what then?

SECOND CITIZEN
The former agents, if they did complain,
What could the belly answer?

MENENIUS  I will tell you,
If you'll bestow a small--of what you have little--
Patience awhile, you'st hear the belly's answer.

SECOND CITIZEN
You're long about it.

MENENIUS  Note me this, good friend;
Your most grave belly was deliberate,
Not rash like his accusers, and thus answered:
"True is it, my incorporate friends," quoth he,
"That I receive the general food at first
Which you do live upon; and fit it is,
Because I am the storehouse and the shop
Of the whole body. But, if you do remember,
I send it through the rivers of your blood
Even to the court, the heart, to th' seat o' th' brain;
And, through the cranks and offices of man,
The strongest nerves and small inferior veins
From me receive that natural competency
Whereby they live. And though that all at once,
You, my good friends"--this says the belly, mark
me--

SECOND CITIZEN
Ay, sir, well, well.

MENENIUS  "Though all at once cannot
See what I do deliver out to each,
Yet I can make my audit up, that all
From me do back receive the flour of all,
And leave me but the bran." What say you to 't?

SECOND CITIZEN
It was an answer. How apply you this?

MENENIUS
The senators of Rome are this good belly,
And you the mutinous members. For examine
Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly
Touching the weal o' th' common, you shall find
No public benefit which you receive
But it proceeds or comes from them to you
And no way from yourselves. What do you think,
You, the great toe of this assembly?

SECOND CITIZEN  I the great toe? Why the great toe?

MENENIUS
For that, being one o' th' lowest, basest, poorest,
Of this most wise rebellion, thou goest foremost.
Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run,
Lead'st first to win some vantage.
But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs.
Rome and her rats are at the point of battle;
The one side must have bale.

[Enter Caius Martius.]

Hail, noble Martius.

MARTIUS
Thanks.--What's the matter, you dissentious rogues,
That, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion,
Make yourselves scabs?

SECOND CITIZEN  We have ever your good word.

MARTIUS
He that will give good words to thee will flatter
Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you curs,
That like nor peace nor war? The one affrights you;
The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you,
Where he should find you lions, finds you hares;
Where foxes, geese. You are no surer, no,
Than is the coal of fire upon the ice
Or hailstone in the sun. Your virtue is
To make him worthy whose offense subdues him,
And curse that justice did it. Who deserves greatness
Deserves your hate; and your affections are
A sick man's appetite, who desires most that
Which would increase his evil. He that depends
Upon your favors swims with fins of lead,
And hews down oaks with rushes. Hang you! Trust
you?
With every minute you do change a mind
And call him noble that was now your hate,
Him vile that was your garland. What's the matter,
That in these several places of the city
You cry against the noble senate, who,
Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else
Would feed on one another?--What's their seeking?

MENENIUS
For corn at their own rates, whereof they say
The city is well stored.

MARTIUS  Hang 'em! They say?
They'll sit by th' fire and presume to know
What's done i' th' Capitol, who's like to rise,
Who thrives, and who declines; side factions and
give out
Conjectural marriages, making parties strong
And feebling such as stand not in their liking
Below their cobbled shoes. They say there's grain
enough?
Would the nobility lay aside their ruth
And let me use my sword, I'd make a quarry
With thousands of these quartered slaves as high
As I could pick my lance.

MENENIUS
Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded;
For though abundantly they lack discretion,
Yet are they passing cowardly. But I beseech you,
What says the other troop?

MARTIUS  They are dissolved. Hang
'em!
They said they were an-hungry, sighed forth
proverbs
That hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat,
That meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent
not
Corn for the rich men only. With these shreds
They vented their complainings, which being
answered
And a petition granted them--a strange one,
To break the heart of generosity
And make bold power look pale--they threw their
caps
As they would hang them on the horns o' th' moon,
Shouting their emulation.

MENENIUS  What is granted them?

MARTIUS
Five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms,
Of their own choice. One's Junius Brutus,
Sicinius Velutus, and I know not. 'Sdeath!
The rabble should have first unroofed the city
Ere so prevailed with me. It will in time
Win upon power and throw forth greater themes
For insurrection's arguing.

MENENIUS  This is strange.

MARTIUS  Go get you home, you fragments.

[Enter a Messenger hastily.]


MESSENGER
Where's Caius Martius?

MARTIUS  Here. What's the matter?

MESSENGER
The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.

MARTIUS
I am glad on 't. Then we shall ha' means to vent
Our musty superfluity.

[Enter Sicinius Velutus, Junius Brutus, (two Tribunes);
Cominius, Titus Lartius, with other Senators.]

See our best elders.

FIRST SENATOR
Martius, 'tis true that you have lately told us:
The Volsces are in arms.

MARTIUS  They have a leader,
Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to 't.
I sin in envying his nobility,
And, were I anything but what I am,
I would wish me only he.

COMINIUS  You have fought together?

MARTIUS
Were half to half the world by th' ears and he
Upon my party, I'd revolt, to make
Only my wars with him. He is a lion
That I am proud to hunt.

FIRST SENATOR  Then, worthy Martius,
Attend upon Cominius to these wars.

COMINIUS
It is your former promise.

MARTIUS  Sir, it is,
And I am constant.--Titus Lartius, thou
Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus' face.
What, art thou stiff? Stand'st out?

LARTIUS  No, Caius Martius,
I'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t' other
Ere stay behind this business.

MENENIUS  O, true bred!

FIRST SENATOR
Your company to th' Capitol, where I know
Our greatest friends attend us.

LARTIUS, [to Cominius]  Lead you on.--
[To Martius.] Follow Cominius. We must follow you;
Right worthy you priority.

COMINIUS  Noble Martius.

FIRST SENATOR, [to the Citizens]
Hence to your homes, begone.

MARTIUS  Nay, let them follow.
The Volsces have much corn; take these rats thither
To gnaw their garners.
[Citizens steal away.]
Worshipful mutineers,
Your valor puts well forth.--Pray follow.
[They exit. Sicinius and Brutus remain.]

SICINIUS
Was ever man so proud as is this Martius?

BRUTUS  He has no equal.

SICINIUS
When we were chosen tribunes for the people--

BRUTUS
Marked you his lip and eyes?

SICINIUS  Nay, but his taunts.

BRUTUS
Being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods--

SICINIUS  Bemock the modest moon.

BRUTUS
The present wars devour him! He is grown
Too proud to be so valiant.

SICINIUS  Such a nature,
Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow
Which he treads on at noon. But I do wonder
His insolence can brook to be commanded
Under Cominius.

BRUTUS  Fame, at the which he aims,
In whom already he's well graced, cannot
Better be held nor more attained than by
A place below the first; for what miscarries
Shall be the General's fault, though he perform
To th' utmost of a man, and giddy censure
Will then cry out of Martius "O, if he
Had borne the business!"

SICINIUS  Besides, if things go well,
Opinion that so sticks on Martius shall
Of his demerits rob Cominius.

BRUTUS  Come.
Half all Cominius' honors are to Martius,
Though Martius earned them not, and all his faults
To Martius shall be honors, though indeed
In aught he merit not.

SICINIUS  Let's hence and hear
How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion,
More than his singularity, he goes
Upon this present action.

BRUTUS  Let's along.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Tullus Aufidius with Senators of Corioles.]


FIRST SENATOR
So, your opinion is, Aufidius,
That they of Rome are entered in our counsels
And know how we proceed.

AUFIDIUS  Is it not yours?
Whatever have been thought on in this state
That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome
Had circumvention? 'Tis not four days gone
Since I heard thence. These are the words--I think
I have the letter here. Yes, here it is.
[(He reads.)] They have pressed a power, but it is not
known
Whether for east or west. The dearth is great.
The people mutinous; and, it is rumored,
Cominius, Martius your old enemy,
Who is of Rome worse hated than of you,
And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman,
These three lead on this preparation
Whither 'tis bent. Most likely 'tis for you.
Consider of it.

FIRST SENATOR  Our army's in the field.
We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready
To answer us.

AUFIDIUS  Nor did you think it folly
To keep your great pretenses veiled till when
They needs must show themselves, which, in the
hatching,
It seemed, appeared to Rome. By the discovery
We shall be shortened in our aim, which was
To take in many towns ere almost Rome
Should know we were afoot.

SECOND SENATOR  Noble Aufidius,
Take your commission; hie you to your bands.
Let us alone to guard Corioles.
If they set down before 's, for the remove
Bring up your army. But I think you'll find
They've not prepared for us.

AUFIDIUS  O, doubt not that;
I speak from certainties. Nay, more,
Some parcels of their power are forth already,
And only hitherward. I leave your Honors.
If we and Caius Martius chance to meet,
'Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike
Till one can do no more.

ALL  The gods assist you!

AUFIDIUS  And keep your Honors safe!

FIRST SENATOR  Farewell.

SECOND SENATOR  Farewell.

ALL  Farewell.
[All exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Volumnia and Virgilia, mother and wife
to Martius. They set them down on two low stools
and sew.]


VOLUMNIA  I pray you, daughter, sing, or express yourself
in a more comfortable sort. If my son were my
husband, I should freelier rejoice in that absence
wherein he won honor than in the embracements
of his bed where he would show most love. When
yet he was but tender-bodied and the only son of
my womb, when youth with comeliness plucked
all gaze his way, when for a day of kings' entreaties
a mother should not sell him an hour from her beholding,
I, considering how honor would become
such a person--that it was no better than picture-like
to hang by th' wall, if renown made it not
stir--was pleased to let him seek danger where he
was like to find fame. To a cruel war I sent him,
from whence he returned, his brows bound with
oak. I tell thee, daughter, I sprang not more in joy
at first hearing he was a man-child than now in
first seeing he had proved himself a man.

VIRGILIA  But had he died in the business, madam, how
then?

VOLUMNIA  Then his good report should have been my
son; I therein would have found issue. Hear me
profess sincerely: had I a dozen sons, each in my
love alike and none less dear than thine and my
good Martius, I had rather had eleven die nobly
for their country than one voluptuously surfeit out
of action.

[Enter a Gentlewoman.]


GENTLEWOMAN  Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to
visit you.

VIRGILIA
Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.

VOLUMNIA  Indeed you shall not.
Methinks I hear hither your husband's drum,
See him pluck Aufidius down by th' hair;
As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him.
Methinks I see him stamp thus and call thus:
"Come on, you cowards! You were got in fear,
Though you were born in Rome." His bloody brow
With his mailed hand then wiping, forth he goes
Like to a harvestman that's tasked to mow
Or all or lose his hire.

VIRGILIA
His bloody brow? O Jupiter, no blood!

VOLUMNIA
Away, you fool! It more becomes a man
Than gilt his trophy. The breasts of Hecuba,
When she did suckle Hector, looked not lovelier
Than Hector's forehead when it spit forth blood
At Grecian sword, contemning.--Tell Valeria
We are fit to bid her welcome.	[Gentlewoman exits.]

VIRGILIA
Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius!

VOLUMNIA
He'll beat Aufidius' head below his knee
And tread upon his neck.

[Enter Valeria with an Usher and a Gentlewoman.]


VALERIA  My ladies both, good day to you.

VOLUMNIA  Sweet madam.

VIRGILIA  I am glad to see your Ladyship.

VALERIA  How do you both? You are manifest housekeepers.
What are you sewing here? A fine spot, in
good faith. How does your little son?

VIRGILIA  I thank your Ladyship; well, good madam.

VOLUMNIA  He had rather see the swords and hear a
drum than look upon his schoolmaster.

VALERIA  O' my word, the father's son! I'll swear 'tis a
very pretty boy. O' my troth, I looked upon him o'
Wednesday half an hour together. H'as such a confirmed
countenance. I saw him run after a gilded
butterfly, and when he caught it, he let it go again,
and after it again, and over and over he comes,
and up again, catched it again. Or whether his fall
enraged him or how 'twas, he did so set his teeth
and tear it. O, I warrant how he mammocked it!

VOLUMNIA  One on 's father's moods.

VALERIA  Indeed, la, 'tis a noble child.

VIRGILIA  A crack, madam.

VALERIA  Come, lay aside your stitchery. I must have
you play the idle huswife with me this afternoon.

VIRGILIA  No, good madam, I will not out of doors.

VALERIA  Not out of doors?

VOLUMNIA  She shall, she shall.

VIRGILIA  Indeed, no, by your patience. I'll not over the
threshold till my lord return from the wars.

VALERIA  Fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably.
Come, you must go visit the good lady that lies in.

VIRGILIA  I will wish her speedy strength and visit her
with my prayers, but I cannot go thither.

VOLUMNIA  Why, I pray you?

VIRGILIA  'Tis not to save labor, nor that I want love.

VALERIA  You would be another Penelope. Yet they say
all the yarn she spun in Ulysses' absence did but fill
Ithaca full of moths. Come, I would your cambric
were sensible as your finger, that you might leave
pricking it for pity. Come, you shall go with us.

VIRGILIA  No, good madam, pardon me; indeed, I will
not forth.

VALERIA  In truth, la, go with me, and I'll tell you excellent
news of your husband.

VIRGILIA  O, good madam, there can be none yet.

VALERIA  Verily, I do not jest with you. There came
news from him last night.

VIRGILIA  Indeed, madam!

VALERIA  In earnest, it's true. I heard a senator speak it.
Thus it is: the Volsces have an army forth, against
whom Cominius the General is gone with one
part of our Roman power. Your lord and Titus Lartius
are set down before their city Corioles. They
nothing doubt prevailing, and to make it brief
wars. This is true, on mine honor, and so, I pray, go
with us.

VIRGILIA  Give me excuse, good madam. I will obey you
in everything hereafter.

VOLUMNIA  Let her alone, lady. As she is now, she will
but disease our better mirth.

VALERIA  In troth, I think she would.--Fare you well,
then.--Come, good sweet lady.--Prithee, Virgilia,
turn thy solemness out o' door, and go along with
us.

VIRGILIA  No, at a word, madam. Indeed, I must not. I
wish you much mirth.

VALERIA  Well, then, farewell.
[Ladies exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Martius, Titus Lartius, with Trumpet, Drum,
and Colors, with Captains and Soldiers, as before
the city of Corioles. To them a Messenger.]


MARTIUS
Yonder comes news. A wager they have met.

LARTIUS
My horse to yours, no.

MARTIUS  'Tis done.

LARTIUS  Agreed.

MARTIUS, [to Messenger]
Say, has our general met the enemy?

MESSENGER
They lie in view but have not spoke as yet.

LARTIUS
So the good horse is mine.

MARTIUS  I'll buy him of you.

LARTIUS
No, I'll nor sell nor give him. Lend you him I will
For half a hundred years.--Summon the town.

MARTIUS  How far off lie these armies?

MESSENGER  Within this mile and half.

MARTIUS
Then shall we hear their 'larum and they ours.
Now, Mars, I prithee, make us quick in work,
That we with smoking swords may march from
hence
To help our fielded friends!--Come, blow thy blast.
[They sound a parley.]

[Enter two Senators with others on the walls of Corioles.]

Tullus Aufidius, is he within your walls?

FIRST SENATOR
No, nor a man that fears you less than he:
That's lesser than a little.	[Drum afar off.]
Hark, our drums
Are bringing forth our youth. We'll break our walls
Rather than they shall pound us up. Our gates,
Which yet seem shut, we have but pinned with
rushes.
They'll open of themselves.	[Alarum far off.]
Hark you, far off!
There is Aufidius. List what work he makes
Amongst your cloven army.
[They exit from the walls.]

MARTIUS  O, they are at it!

LARTIUS
Their noise be our instruction.--Ladders, ho!

[Enter the Army of the Volsces as through the city gates.]


MARTIUS
They fear us not but issue forth their city.--
Now put your shields before your hearts, and fight
With hearts more proof than shields.--Advance,
brave Titus.
They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts,
Which makes me sweat with wrath.--Come on, my
fellows!
He that retires, I'll take him for a Volsce,
And he shall feel mine edge.
[Alarum. The Romans are beat back to their trenches.]
[They exit, with the Volsces following.]

[Enter Martius cursing, with Roman soldiers.]


MARTIUS
All the contagion of the south light on you,
You shames of Rome! You herd of--Boils and
plagues
Plaster you o'er, that you may be abhorred
Farther than seen, and one infect another
Against the wind a mile! You souls of geese,
That bear the shapes of men, how have you run
From slaves that apes would beat! Pluto and hell!
All hurt behind. Backs red, and faces pale
With flight and agued fear! Mend, and charge home,
Or, by the fires of heaven, I'll leave the foe
And make my wars on you. Look to 't. Come on!
If you'll stand fast, we'll beat them to their wives,
As they us to our trenches. Follow 's!

[Another alarum. The Volsces re-enter and are driven
back to the gates of Corioles, which open to admit
them.]

So, now the gates are ope. Now prove good
seconds!
'Tis for the followers fortune widens them,
Not for the fliers. Mark me, and do the like.
[Martius follows the fleeing Volsces through
the gates, and is shut in.]

FIRST SOLDIER  Foolhardiness, not I.

SECOND SOLDIER  Nor I.

FIRST SOLDIER  See they have shut him in.
[Alarum continues.]

ALL  To th' pot, I warrant him.

[Enter Titus Lartius.]


LARTIUS
What is become of Martius?

ALL  Slain, sir, doubtless.

FIRST SOLDIER
Following the fliers at the very heels,
With them he enters, who upon the sudden
Clapped to their gates. He is himself alone,
To answer all the city.

LARTIUS  O, noble fellow,
Who sensibly outdares his senseless sword,
And when it bows, stand'st up! Thou art left,
Martius.
A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art,
Were not so rich a jewel. Thou wast a soldier
Even to Cato's wish, not fierce and terrible
Only in strokes, but with thy grim looks and
The thunderlike percussion of thy sounds
Thou mad'st thine enemies shake, as if the world
Were feverous and did tremble.

[Enter Martius, bleeding, as if from Corioles, assaulted
by the enemy.]


FIRST SOLDIER  Look, sir.

LARTIUS  O, 'tis Martius!
Let's fetch him off or make remain alike.
[They fight, and all enter the city, exiting the stage.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter certain Romans, with spoils.]


FIRST ROMAN  This will I carry to Rome.

SECOND ROMAN  And I this.

THIRD ROMAN  A murrain on 't! I took this for silver.

[Enter Martius, and Titus Lartius with a Trumpet.]


MARTIUS
See here these movers that do prize their hours
At a cracked drachma. Cushions, leaden spoons,
Irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would
Bury with those that wore them, these base slaves,
Ere yet the fight be done, pack up. Down with them!
[The Romans with spoils exit.]
[Alarum continues still afar off.]
And hark, what noise the General makes! To him!
There is the man of my soul's hate, Aufidius,
Piercing our Romans. Then, valiant Titus, take
Convenient numbers to make good the city,
Whilst I, with those that have the spirit, will haste
To help Cominius.

LARTIUS  Worthy sir, thou bleed'st.
Thy exercise hath been too violent
For a second course of fight.

MARTIUS  Sir, praise me not.
My work hath yet not warmed me. Fare you well.
The blood I drop is rather physical
Than dangerous to me. To Aufidius thus
I will appear and fight.

LARTIUS  Now the fair goddess Fortune
Fall deep in love with thee, and her great charms
Misguide thy opposers' swords! Bold gentleman,
Prosperity be thy page!

MARTIUS  Thy friend no less
Than those she placeth highest! So farewell.

LARTIUS  Thou worthiest Martius!	[Martius exits.]
Go sound thy trumpet in the marketplace.
Call thither all the officers o' th' town,
Where they shall know our mind. Away!
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Cominius as it were in retire, with Soldiers.]


COMINIUS
Breathe you, my friends. Well fought! We are come
off
Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands
Nor cowardly in retire. Believe me, sirs,
We shall be charged again. Whiles we have struck,
By interims and conveying gusts we have heard
The charges of our friends. The Roman gods
Lead their successes as we wish our own,
That both our powers, with smiling fronts
encount'ring,
May give you thankful sacrifice!

[Enter a Messenger.]

Thy news?

MESSENGER
The citizens of Corioles have issued
And given to Lartius and to Martius battle.
I saw our party to their trenches driven,
And then I came away.

COMINIUS  Though thou speakest truth,
Methinks thou speak'st not well. How long is 't
since?

MESSENGER  Above an hour, my lord.

COMINIUS
'Tis not a mile; briefly we heard their drums.
How couldst thou in a mile confound an hour
And bring thy news so late?

MESSENGER  Spies of the Volsces
Held me in chase, that I was forced to wheel
Three or four miles about; else had I, sir,
Half an hour since brought my report.	[He exits.]

[Enter Martius, bloody.]


COMINIUS  Who's yonder,
That does appear as he were flayed? O gods,
He has the stamp of Martius, and I have
Before-time seen him thus.

MARTIUS  Come I too late?

COMINIUS
The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabor
More than I know the sound of Martius' tongue
From every meaner man.

MARTIUS  Come I too late?

COMINIUS
Ay, if you come not in the blood of others,
But mantled in your own.

MARTIUS  O, let me clip you
In arms as sound as when I wooed, in heart
As merry as when our nuptial day was done
And tapers burnt to bedward!	[They embrace.]

COMINIUS
Flower of warriors, how is 't with Titus Lartius?

MARTIUS
As with a man busied about decrees,
Condemning some to death and some to exile;
Ransoming him or pitying, threat'ning th' other;
Holding Corioles in the name of Rome
Even like a fawning greyhound in the leash,
To let him slip at will.

COMINIUS  Where is that slave
Which told me they had beat you to your trenches?
Where is he? Call him hither.

MARTIUS  Let him alone.
He did inform the truth. But for our gentlemen,
The common file--a plague! Tribunes for them!--
The mouse ne'er shunned the cat as they did budge
From rascals worse than they.

COMINIUS  But how prevailed you?

MARTIUS
Will the time serve to tell? I do not think.
Where is the enemy? Are you lords o' th' field?
If not, why cease you till you are so?

COMINIUS
Martius, we have at disadvantage fought
And did retire to win our purpose.

MARTIUS
How lies their battle? Know you on which side
They have placed their men of trust?

COMINIUS  As I guess,
Martius,
Their bands i' th' vaward are the Antiates,
Of their best trust; o'er them Aufidius,
Their very heart of hope.

MARTIUS  I do beseech you,
By all the battles wherein we have fought,
By th' blood we have shed together, by th' vows we
have made
To endure friends, that you directly set me
Against Aufidius and his Antiates,
And that you not delay the present, but,
Filling the air with swords advanced and darts,
We prove this very hour.

COMINIUS  Though I could wish
You were conducted to a gentle bath
And balms applied to you, yet dare I never
Deny your asking. Take your choice of those
That best can aid your action.

MARTIUS  Those are they
That most are willing. If any such be here--
As it were sin to doubt--that love this painting
Wherein you see me smeared; if any fear
Lesser his person than an ill report;
If any think brave death outweighs bad life,
And that his country's dearer than himself;
Let him alone, or so many so minded,
Wave thus to express his disposition
And follow Martius.	[He waves his sword.]
[They all shout and wave their swords,
take him up in their arms, and cast up their caps.]
O, me alone! Make you a sword of me?
If these shows be not outward, which of you
But is four Volsces? None of you but is
Able to bear against the great Aufidius
A shield as hard as his. A certain number,
Though thanks to all, must I select from all.
The rest shall bear the business in some other fight,
As cause will be obeyed. Please you to march,
And I shall quickly draw out my command,
Which men are best inclined.

COMINIUS  March on, my fellows.
Make good this ostentation, and you shall
Divide in all with us.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Titus Lartius, having set a guard upon Corioles, going
with Drum and Trumpet toward Cominius and Caius
Martius, enters with a Lieutenant, other Soldiers,
and a Scout.]


LARTIUS
So, let the ports be guarded. Keep your duties
As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch
Those centuries to our aid; the rest will serve
For a short holding. If we lose the field,
We cannot keep the town.

LIEUTENANT  Fear not our care, sir.

LARTIUS  Hence, and shut your gates upon 's.
[(To the Scout.)] Our guider, come. To th' Roman
camp conduct us.
[They exit, the Lieutenant one way, Lartius another.]

Scene 8
=======
[Alarum, as in battle.
Enter Martius and Aufidius at several doors.]


MARTIUS
I'll fight with none but thee, for I do hate thee
Worse than a promise-breaker.

AUFIDIUS  We hate alike.
Not Afric owns a serpent I abhor
More than thy fame and envy. Fix thy foot.

MARTIUS
Let the first budger die the other's slave,
And the gods doom him after!

AUFIDIUS  If I fly, Martius,
Hollo me like a hare.

MARTIUS  Within these three hours,
Tullus,
Alone I fought in your Corioles' walls
And made what work I pleased. 'Tis not my blood
Wherein thou seest me masked. For thy revenge,
Wrench up thy power to th' highest.

AUFIDIUS  Wert thou the
Hector
That was the whip of your bragged progeny,
Thou shouldst not scape me here.

[Here they fight, and certain Volsces come in
the aid of Aufidius.]
[(To the Volsces.)] Officious and not valiant, you have
shamed me
In your condemned seconds.
[Martius fights till they be driven in breathless.
Aufidius and Martius exit, separately.]

Scene 9
=======
[Alarum. A retreat is sounded. Flourish. Enter, at one
door, Cominius with the Romans; at another door
Martius, with his arm in a scarf.]


COMINIUS, [to Martius]
If I should tell thee o'er this thy day's work,
Thou 't not believe thy deeds. But I'll report it
Where senators shall mingle tears with smiles;
Where great patricians shall attend and shrug,
I' th' end admire; where ladies shall be frighted
And, gladly quaked, hear more; where the dull
tribunes,
That with the fusty plebeians hate thine honors,
Shall say against their hearts "We thank the gods
Our Rome hath such a soldier."
Yet cam'st thou to a morsel of this feast,
Having fully dined before.

[Enter Titus Lartius with his power, from the pursuit.]


LARTIUS  O general,
Here is the steed, we the caparison.
Hadst thou beheld--

MARTIUS  Pray now, no more. My mother,
Who has a charter to extol her blood,
When she does praise me grieves me. I have done
As you have done--that's what I can;
Induced as you have been--that's for my country.
He that has but effected his good will
Hath overta'en mine act.

COMINIUS  You shall not be
The grave of your deserving. Rome must know
The value of her own. 'Twere a concealment
Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement,
To hide your doings and to silence that
Which, to the spire and top of praises vouched,
Would seem but modest. Therefore, I beseech you--
In sign of what you are, not to reward
What you have done--before our army hear me.

MARTIUS
I have some wounds upon me, and they smart
To hear themselves remembered.

COMINIUS  Should they not,
Well might they fester 'gainst ingratitude
And tent themselves with death. Of all the horses--
Whereof we have ta'en good and good store--of all
The treasure in this field achieved and city,
We render you the tenth, to be ta'en forth
Before the common distribution
At your only choice.

MARTIUS  I thank you, general,
But cannot make my heart consent to take
A bribe to pay my sword. I do refuse it
And stand upon my common part with those
That have beheld the doing.
[A long flourish. They all cry "Martius, Martius!"
and cast up their caps and lances.
Cominius and Lartius stand bare.]
May these same instruments, which you profane,
Never sound more! When drums and trumpets shall
I' th' field prove flatterers, let courts and cities be
Made all of false-faced soothing! When steel grows
Soft as the parasite's silk, let him be made
An ovator for th' wars! No more, I say.
For that I have not washed my nose that bled,
Or foiled some debile wretch--which, without note,
Here's many else have done--you shout me forth
In acclamations hyperbolical,
As if I loved my little should be dieted
In praises sauced with lies.

COMINIUS  Too modest are you,
More cruel to your good report than grateful
To us that give you truly. By your patience,
If 'gainst yourself you be incensed, we'll put you,
Like one that means his proper harm, in manacles,
Then reason safely with you. Therefore be it known,
As to us to all the world, that Caius Martius
Wears this war's garland, in token of the which
My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him,
With all his trim belonging. And from this time,
For what he did before Corioles, call him,
With all th' applause and clamor of the host,
Martius Caius Coriolanus! Bear
Th' addition nobly ever!

[Flourish. Trumpets sound, and drums.]


ALL
Martius Caius Coriolanus!

CORIOLANUS  I will go wash;
And when my face is fair, you shall perceive
Whether I blush or no. Howbeit, I thank you.
I mean to stride your steed and at all times
To undercrest your good addition
To th' fairness of my power.

COMINIUS  So, to our tent,
Where, ere we do repose us, we will write
To Rome of our success.--You, Titus Lartius,
Must to Corioles back. Send us to Rome
The best, with whom we may articulate
For their own good and ours.

LARTIUS  I shall, my lord.

CORIOLANUS
The gods begin to mock me. I, that now
Refused most princely gifts, am bound to beg
Of my lord general.

COMINIUS  Take 't, 'tis yours. What is 't?

CORIOLANUS
I sometime lay here in Corioles
At a poor man's house; he used me kindly.
He cried to me; I saw him prisoner;
But then Aufidius was within my view,
And wrath o'erwhelmed my pity. I request you
To give my poor host freedom.

COMINIUS  O, well begged!
Were he the butcher of my son, he should
Be free as is the wind.--Deliver him, Titus.

LARTIUS
Martius, his name?

CORIOLANUS  By Jupiter, forgot!
I am weary; yea, my memory is tired.
Have we no wine here?

COMINIUS  Go we to our tent.
The blood upon your visage dries; 'tis time
It should be looked to. Come.
[A flourish of cornets. They exit.]

Scene 10
========
[Enter Tullus Aufidius bloody, with two or three Soldiers.]


AUFIDIUS  The town is ta'en.

SOLDIER
'Twill be delivered back on good condition.

AUFIDIUS  Condition?
I would I were a Roman, for I cannot,
Being a Volsce, be that I am. Condition?
What good condition can a treaty find
I' th' part that is at mercy? Five times, Martius,
I have fought with thee; so often hast thou beat me
And wouldst do so, I think, should we encounter
As often as we eat. By th' elements,
If e'er again I meet him beard to beard,
He's mine, or I am his. Mine emulation
Hath not that honor in 't it had; for where
I thought to crush him in an equal force,
True sword to sword, I'll potch at him some way
Or wrath or craft may get him.

SOLDIER  He's the devil.

AUFIDIUS
Bolder, though not so subtle. My valor's poisoned
With only suff'ring stain by him; for him
Shall fly out of itself. Nor sleep nor sanctuary,
Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol,
The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice,
Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up
Their rotten privilege and custom 'gainst
My hate to Martius. Where I find him, were it
At home, upon my brother's guard, even there,
Against the hospitable canon, would I
Wash my fierce hand in 's heart. Go you to th' city;
Learn how 'tis held and what they are that must
Be hostages for Rome.

SOLDIER  Will not you go?

AUFIDIUS
I am attended at the cypress grove. I pray you--
'Tis south the city mills--bring me word thither
How the world goes, that to the pace of it
I may spur on my journey.

SOLDIER  I shall, sir.
[They exit, Aufidius through one door,
Soldiers through another.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Menenius with the two Tribunes of the people,
Sicinius and Brutus.]


MENENIUS  The augurer tells me we shall have news
tonight.

BRUTUS  Good or bad?

MENENIUS  Not according to the prayer of the people,
for they love not Martius.

SICINIUS  Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.

MENENIUS  Pray you, who does the wolf love?

SICINIUS  The lamb.

MENENIUS  Ay, to devour him, as the hungry plebeians
would the noble Martius.

BRUTUS  He's a lamb indeed, that baas like a bear.

MENENIUS  He's a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb.
You two are old men; tell me one thing that I shall
ask you.

BOTH  Well, sir.

MENENIUS  In what enormity is Martius poor in, that
you two have not in abundance?

BRUTUS  He's poor in no one fault, but stored with all.

SICINIUS  Especially in pride.

BRUTUS  And topping all others in boasting.

MENENIUS  This is strange now. Do you two know how
you are censured here in the city, I mean of us o'
th' right-hand file, do you?

BOTH  Why, how are we censured?

MENENIUS  Because you talk of pride now, will you not
be angry?

BOTH  Well, well, sir, well?

MENENIUS  Why, 'tis no great matter; for a very little
thief of occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience.
Give your dispositions the reins, and be
angry at your pleasures, at the least, if you take it
as a pleasure to you in being so. You blame Martius
for being proud.

BRUTUS  We do it not alone, sir.

MENENIUS  I know you can do very little alone, for
your helps are many, or else your actions would
grow wondrous single. Your abilities are too infantlike
for doing much alone. You talk of pride. O,
that you could turn your eyes toward the napes
of your necks and make but an interior survey of
your good selves! O, that you could!

BOTH  What then, sir?

MENENIUS  Why, then you should discover a brace of
unmeriting, proud, violent, testy magistrates, alias
fools, as any in Rome.

SICINIUS  Menenius, you are known well enough, too.

MENENIUS  I am known to be a humorous patrician and
one that loves a cup of hot wine with not a drop of
allaying Tiber in 't; said to be something imperfect
in favoring the first complaint, hasty and tinder-like
upon too trivial motion; one that converses
more with the buttock of the night than with the
forehead of the morning. What I think I utter,
and spend my malice in my breath. Meeting two
such wealsmen as you are--I cannot call you
Lycurguses--if the drink you give me touch my
palate adversely, I make a crooked face at it. I cannot
say your Worships have delivered the matter
well when I find the ass in compound with the
major part of your syllables. And though I must
be content to bear with those that say you are reverend
grave men, yet they lie deadly that tell you
have good faces. If you see this in the map of my
microcosm, follows it that I am known well enough
too? What harm can your bisson conspectuities
glean out of this character, if I be known well
enough, too?

BRUTUS  Come, sir, come; we know you well enough.

MENENIUS  You know neither me, yourselves, nor anything.
You are ambitious for poor knaves' caps
and legs. You wear out a good wholesome forenoon
in hearing a cause between an orange-wife
and a faucet-seller, and then rejourn the controversy
of threepence to a second day of audience.
When you are hearing a matter between party and
party, if you chance to be pinched with the colic,
you make faces like mummers, set up the bloody
flag against all patience, and, in roaring for a
chamber pot, dismiss the controversy bleeding,
the more entangled by your hearing. All the peace
you make in their cause is calling both the parties
knaves. You are a pair of strange ones.

BRUTUS  Come, come. You are well understood to be a
perfecter giber for the table than a necessary
bencher in the Capitol.

MENENIUS  Our very priests must become mockers if
they shall encounter such ridiculous subjects as
you are. When you speak best unto the purpose, it
is not worth the wagging of your beards, and your
beards deserve not so honorable a grave as to
stuff a botcher's cushion or to be entombed in an
ass's packsaddle. Yet you must be saying Martius is
proud, who, in a cheap estimation, is worth all
your predecessors since Deucalion, though peradventure
some of the best of 'em were hereditary
hangmen. Good e'en to your Worships. More of
your conversation would infect my brain, being
the herdsmen of the beastly plebeians. I will be
bold to take my leave of you.
[He begins to exit. Brutus and Sicinius stand aside.]

[Enter Volumnia, Virgilia, and Valeria.]

How now, my as fair as noble ladies--and the
moon, were she earthly, no nobler--whither do
you follow your eyes so fast?

VOLUMNIA  Honorable Menenius, my boy Martius approaches.
For the love of Juno, let's go!

MENENIUS  Ha? Martius coming home?

VOLUMNIA  Ay, worthy Menenius, and with most prosperous
approbation.

MENENIUS  Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee! [(He
throws his cap in the air.)] Hoo! Martius coming
home?

VALERIA, VIRGILIA  Nay, 'tis true.

VOLUMNIA  Look, here's a letter from him. [She produces
a paper.] The state hath another, his wife another,
and I think there's one at home for you.

MENENIUS  I will make my very house reel tonight. A
letter for me?

VIRGILIA  Yes, certain, there's a letter for you; I saw 't.

MENENIUS  A letter for me? It gives me an estate of
seven years' health, in which time I will make a lip
at the physician. The most sovereign prescription
in Galen is but empiricutic and, to this preservative,
of no better report than a horse drench. Is he not
wounded? He was wont to come home wounded.

VIRGILIA  O no, no, no!

VOLUMNIA  O, he is wounded, I thank the gods for 't.

MENENIUS  So do I too, if it be not too much. Brings he
victory in his pocket, the wounds become him.

VOLUMNIA  On 's brows, Menenius. He comes the third
time home with the oaken garland.

MENENIUS  Has he disciplined Aufidius soundly?

VOLUMNIA  Titus Lartius writes they fought together,
but Aufidius got off.

MENENIUS  And 'twas time for him too, I'll warrant him
that. An he had stayed by him, I would not have
been so 'fidiused for all the chests in Corioles and
the gold that's in them. Is the Senate possessed of
this?

VOLUMNIA  Good ladies, let's go.--Yes, yes, yes. The
Senate has letters from the General, wherein he
gives my son the whole name of the war. He hath
in this action outdone his former deeds doubly.

VALERIA  In troth, there's wondrous things spoke of
him.

MENENIUS  Wondrous? Ay, I warrant you, and not without
his true purchasing.

VIRGILIA  The gods grant them true.

VOLUMNIA  True? Pow waw!

MENENIUS  True? I'll be sworn they are true. Where is
he wounded? [(To the Tribunes.)] God save your
good Worships! Martius is coming home; he has
more cause to be proud.--Where is he wounded?

VOLUMNIA  I' th' shoulder and i' th' left arm. There will
be large cicatrices to show the people when he
shall stand for his place. He received in the repulse
of Tarquin seven hurts i' th' body.

MENENIUS  One i' th' neck and two i' th' thigh--there's
nine that I know.

VOLUMNIA  He had, before this last expedition, twenty-five
wounds upon him.

MENENIUS  Now it's twenty-seven. Every gash was an
enemy's grave. [(A shout and flourish.)] Hark, the
trumpets!

VOLUMNIA  These are the ushers of Martius: before him
he carries noise, and behind him he leaves tears.
Death, that dark spirit, in 's nervy arm doth lie,
Which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.
[A sennet.]

[Enter Cominius the General and Titus Lartius, between
them Coriolanus crowned with an oaken garland, with
Captains and Soldiers and a Herald. Trumpets sound.]


HERALD
Know, Rome, that all alone Martius did fight
Within Corioles' gates, where he hath won,
With fame, a name to Martius Caius; these
In honor follows "Coriolanus."
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus.
[Sound flourish.]

ALL
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!

CORIOLANUS
No more of this. It does offend my heart.
Pray now, no more.

COMINIUS  Look, sir, your mother.

CORIOLANUS  O,
You have, I know, petitioned all the gods
For my prosperity.	[Kneels.]

VOLUMNIA  Nay, my good soldier, up.
[He stands.]
My gentle Martius, worthy Caius, and
By deed-achieving honor newly named--
What is it? Coriolanus must I call thee?
But, O, thy wife--

CORIOLANUS  My gracious silence, hail.
Wouldst thou have laughed had I come coffined
home,
That weep'st to see me triumph? Ah, my dear,
Such eyes the widows in Corioles wear
And mothers that lack sons.

MENENIUS  Now the gods crown
thee!

CORIOLANUS
And live you yet? [(To Valeria.)] O, my sweet lady,
pardon.

VOLUMNIA
I know not where to turn. O, welcome home!--
And, welcome, general.--And you're welcome all.

MENENIUS
A hundred thousand welcomes! I could weep,
And I could laugh; I am light and heavy. Welcome.
A curse begin at very root on 's heart
That is not glad to see thee! You are three
That Rome should dote on; yet, by the faith of men,
We have some old crab trees here at home that will
not
Be grafted to your relish. Yet welcome, warriors!
We call a nettle but a nettle, and
The faults of fools but folly.

COMINIUS  Ever right.

CORIOLANUS  Menenius ever, ever.

HERALD
Give way there, and go on!

CORIOLANUS, [to Volumnia and Virgilia]  Your hand
and yours.
Ere in our own house I do shade my head,
The good patricians must be visited,
From whom I have received not only greetings,
But with them change of honors.

VOLUMNIA  I have lived
To see inherited my very wishes
And the buildings of my fancy. Only
There's one thing wanting, which I doubt not but
Our Rome will cast upon thee.

CORIOLANUS  Know, good mother,
I had rather be their servant in my way
Than sway with them in theirs.

COMINIUS  On, to the Capitol.
[Flourish of cornets. They exit in state, as before.]

[Brutus and Sicinius come forward.]



BRUTUS
All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights
Are spectacled to see him. Your prattling nurse
Into a rapture lets her baby cry
While she chats him. The kitchen malkin pins
Her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck,
Clamb'ring the walls to eye him. Stalls, bulks,
windows
Are smothered up, leads filled, and ridges horsed
With variable complexions, all agreeing
In earnestness to see him. Seld-shown flamens
Do press among the popular throngs and puff
To win a vulgar station. Our veiled dames
Commit the war of white and damask in
Their nicely-gauded cheeks to th' wanton spoil
Of Phoebus' burning kisses. Such a pother,
As if that whatsoever god who leads him
Were slyly crept into his human powers
And gave him graceful posture.

SICINIUS  On the sudden
I warrant him consul.

BRUTUS  Then our office may,
During his power, go sleep.

SICINIUS
He cannot temp'rately transport his honors
From where he should begin and end, but will
Lose those he hath won.

BRUTUS  In that there's comfort.

SICINIUS  Doubt
not
The commoners, for whom we stand, but they
Upon their ancient malice will forget
With the least cause these his new honors--which
That he will give them make I as little question
As he is proud to do 't.

BRUTUS  I heard him swear,
Were he to stand for consul, never would he
Appear i' th' marketplace nor on him put
The napless vesture of humility,
Nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds
To th' people, beg their stinking breaths.

SICINIUS  'Tis right.

BRUTUS
It was his word. O, he would miss it rather
Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him
And the desire of the nobles.

SICINIUS  I wish no better
Than have him hold that purpose and to put it
In execution.

BRUTUS  'Tis most like he will.

SICINIUS
It shall be to him then as our good wills,
A sure destruction.

BRUTUS  So it must fall out
To him, or our authority's for an end.
We must suggest the people in what hatred
He still hath held them; that to 's power he would
Have made them mules, silenced their pleaders, and
Dispropertied their freedoms; holding them
In human action and capacity
Of no more soul nor fitness for the world
Than camels in their war, who have their provand
Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows
For sinking under them.

SICINIUS  This, as you say, suggested
At some time when his soaring insolence
Shall touch the people--which time shall not want
If he be put upon 't, and that's as easy
As to set dogs on sheep--will be his fire
To kindle their dry stubble, and their blaze
Shall darken him forever.

[Enter a Messenger.]


BRUTUS  What's the matter?

MESSENGER
You are sent for to the Capitol. 'Tis thought
That Martius shall be consul. I have seen
The dumb men throng to see him, and the blind
To hear him speak; matrons flung gloves,
Ladies and maids their scarves and handkerchiefs,
Upon him as he passed; the nobles bended
As to Jove's statue, and the Commons made
A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts.
I never saw the like.

BRUTUS  Let's to the Capitol,
And carry with us ears and eyes for th' time,
But hearts for the event.

SICINIUS  Have with you.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter two Officers, to lay cushions, as it were
in the Capitol.]


FIRST OFFICER  Come, come. They are almost here. How
many stand for consulships?

SECOND OFFICER  Three, they say; but 'tis thought of
everyone Coriolanus will carry it.

FIRST OFFICER  That's a brave fellow, but he's vengeance
proud and loves not the common people.

SECOND OFFICER  'Faith, there hath been many great
men that have flattered the people who ne'er loved
them; and there be many that they have loved they
know not wherefore; so that, if they love they
know not why, they hate upon no better a ground.
Therefore, for Coriolanus neither to care whether
they love or hate him manifests the true knowledge
he has in their disposition and, out of his noble
carelessness, lets them plainly see 't.

FIRST OFFICER  If he did not care whether he had their
love or no, he waved indifferently 'twixt doing them
neither good nor harm; but he seeks their hate with
greater devotion than they can render it him and
leaves nothing undone that may fully discover him
their opposite. Now, to seem to affect the malice
and displeasure of the people is as bad as that
which he dislikes, to flatter them for their love.

SECOND OFFICER  He hath deserved worthily of his
country, and his ascent is not by such easy degrees
as those who, having been supple and courteous to
the people, bonneted, without any further deed to
have them at all into their estimation and report;
but he hath so planted his honors in their eyes and
his actions in their hearts that for their tongues to
be silent and not confess so much were a kind of
ingrateful injury. To report otherwise were a malice
that, giving itself the lie, would pluck reproof
and rebuke from every ear that heard it.

FIRST OFFICER  No more of him; he's a worthy man.
Make way. They are coming.

[A sennet. Enter the Patricians and the Tribunes of the
people, Lictors before them; Coriolanus, Menenius,
Cominius the consul. The Patricians sit. Sicinius
and Brutus take their places by themselves.
Coriolanus stands.]


MENENIUS
Having determined of the Volsces and
To send for Titus Lartius, it remains,
As the main point of this our after-meeting,
To gratify his noble service that
Hath thus stood for his country. Therefore please
you,
Most reverend and grave elders, to desire
The present consul and last general
In our well-found successes to report
A little of that worthy work performed
By Martius Caius Coriolanus, whom
We met here both to thank and to remember
With honors like himself.	[Coriolanus sits.]

FIRST SENATOR  Speak, good Cominius.
Leave nothing out for length, and make us think
Rather our state's defective for requital,
Than we to stretch it out. [(To the Tribunes.)]
Masters o' th' people,
We do request your kindest ears and, after,
Your loving motion toward the common body
To yield what passes here.

SICINIUS  We are convented
Upon a pleasing treaty and have hearts
Inclinable to honor and advance
The theme of our assembly.

BRUTUS  Which the rather
We shall be blest to do if he remember
A kinder value of the people than
He hath hereto prized them at.

MENENIUS  That's off, that's off!
I would you rather had been silent. Please you
To hear Cominius speak?

BRUTUS  Most willingly,
But yet my caution was more pertinent
Than the rebuke you give it.

MENENIUS  He loves your people,
But tie him not to be their bedfellow.--
Worthy Cominius, speak.
[Coriolanus rises and offers to go away.]
Nay, keep your place.

FIRST SENATOR
Sit, Coriolanus. Never shame to hear
What you have nobly done.

CORIOLANUS  Your Honors, pardon.
I had rather have my wounds to heal again
Than hear say how I got them.

BRUTUS  Sir, I hope
My words disbenched you not?

CORIOLANUS  No, sir. Yet oft,
When blows have made me stay, I fled from words.
You soothed not, therefore hurt not; but your
people,
I love them as they weigh.

MENENIUS  Pray now, sit down.

CORIOLANUS
I had rather have one scratch my head i' th' sun
When the alarum were struck than idly sit
To hear my nothings monstered.	[Coriolanus exits.]

MENENIUS  Masters of the people,
Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter--
That's thousand to one good one--when you now
see
He had rather venture all his limbs for honor
Than one on 's ears to hear it.--Proceed, Cominius.

COMINIUS
I shall lack voice. The deeds of Coriolanus
Should not be uttered feebly. It is held
That valor is the chiefest virtue and
Most dignifies the haver; if it be,
The man I speak of cannot in the world
Be singly counterpoised. At sixteen years,
When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he fought
Beyond the mark of others. Our then dictator,
Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight
When with his Amazonian chin he drove
The bristled lips before him. He bestrid
An o'erpressed Roman and i' th' Consul's view
Slew three opposers. Tarquin's self he met
And struck him on his knee. In that day's feats,
When he might act the woman in the scene,
He proved best man i' th' field and for his meed
Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age
Man-entered thus, he waxed like a sea,
And in the brunt of seventeen battles since
He lurched all swords of the garland. For this last,
Before and in Corioles, let me say,
I cannot speak him home. He stopped the flyers
And by his rare example made the coward
Turn terror into sport. As weeds before
A vessel under sail, so men obeyed
And fell below his stem. His sword, Death's stamp,
Where it did mark, it took; from face to foot
He was a thing of blood, whose every motion
Was timed with dying cries. Alone he entered
The mortal gate o' th' city, which he painted
With shunless destiny; aidless came off
And with a sudden reinforcement struck
Corioles like a planet. Now all's his,
When by and by the din of war gan pierce
His ready sense; then straight his doubled spirit
Requickened what in flesh was fatigate,
And to the battle came he, where he did
Run reeking o'er the lives of men as if
'Twere a perpetual spoil; and till we called
Both field and city ours, he never stood
To ease his breast with panting.

MENENIUS  Worthy man!

FIRST SENATOR
He cannot but with measure fit the honors
Which we devise him.

COMINIUS  Our spoils he kicked at
And looked upon things precious as they were
The common muck of the world. He covets less
Than misery itself would give, rewards
His deeds with doing them, and is content
To spend the time to end it.

MENENIUS  He's right noble.
Let him be called for.

FIRST SENATOR  Call Coriolanus.

OFFICER  He doth appear.

[Enter Coriolanus.]


MENENIUS
The Senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased
To make thee consul.

CORIOLANUS  I do owe them still
My life and services.

MENENIUS  It then remains
That you do speak to the people.

CORIOLANUS  I do beseech you,
Let me o'erleap that custom, for I cannot
Put on the gown, stand naked, and entreat them
For my wounds' sake to give their suffrage. Please
you
That I may pass this doing.

SICINIUS  Sir, the people
Must have their voices; neither will they bate
One jot of ceremony.

MENENIUS, [to Coriolanus]  Put them not to 't.
Pray you, go fit you to the custom, and
Take to you, as your predecessors have,
Your honor with your form.

CORIOLANUS  It is a part
That I shall blush in acting, and might well
Be taken from the people.

BRUTUS, [to Sicinius]  Mark you that?

CORIOLANUS
To brag unto them "Thus I did, and thus!"
Show them th' unaching scars, which I should hide,
As if I had received them for the hire
Of their breath only!

MENENIUS  Do not stand upon 't.--
We recommend to you, tribunes of the people,
Our purpose to them, and to our noble consul
Wish we all joy and honor.

SENATORS
To Coriolanus come all joy and honor!
[Flourish cornets. Then they exit. Sicinius and
Brutus remain.]

BRUTUS
You see how he intends to use the people.

SICINIUS
May they perceive 's intent! He will require them
As if he did contemn what he requested
Should be in them to give.

BRUTUS  Come, we'll inform them
Of our proceedings here. On th' marketplace
I know they do attend us.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter seven or eight Citizens.]


FIRST CITIZEN  Once, if he do require our voices, we
ought not to deny him.

SECOND CITIZEN  We may, sir, if we will.

THIRD CITIZEN  We have power in ourselves to do it, but
it is a power that we have no power to do; for, if
he show us his wounds and tell us his deeds, we
are to put our tongues into those wounds and
speak for them. So, if he tell us his noble deeds, we
must also tell him our noble acceptance of them.
Ingratitude is monstrous, and for the multitude to
be ingrateful were to make a monster of the multitude,
of the which, we being members, should
bring ourselves to be monstrous members.

FIRST CITIZEN  And to make us no better thought of, a
little help will serve; for once we stood up about
the corn, he himself stuck not to call us the many-headed
multitude.

THIRD CITIZEN  We have been called so of many; not that
our heads are some brown, some black, some
abram, some bald, but that our wits are so diversely
colored; and truly I think if all our wits were to
issue out of one skull, they would fly east, west,
north, south, and their consent of one direct way
should be at once to all the points o' th' compass.

SECOND CITIZEN  Think you so? Which way do you
judge my wit would fly?

THIRD CITIZEN  Nay, your wit will not so soon out as another
man's will; 'tis strongly wedged up in a blockhead.
But if it were at liberty, 'twould sure
southward.

SECOND CITIZEN  Why that way?

THIRD CITIZEN  To lose itself in a fog, where, being three
parts melted away with rotten dews, the fourth
would return for conscience' sake, to help to get
thee a wife.

SECOND CITIZEN  You are never without your tricks. You
may, you may.

THIRD CITIZEN  Are you all resolved to give your voices?
But that's no matter; the greater part carries it. I
say, if he would incline to the people, there was
never a worthier man.

[Enter Coriolanus in a gown of humility, with Menenius.]

Here he comes, and in the gown of humility. Mark
his behavior. We are not to stay all together, but to
come by him where he stands, by ones, by twos,
and by threes. He's to make his requests by particulars,
wherein every one of us has a single honor
in giving him our own voices with our own tongues.
Therefore follow me, and I'll direct you how you
shall go by him.

ALL  Content, content.	[Citizens exit.]

MENENIUS
O sir, you are not right. Have you not known
The worthiest men have done 't?

CORIOLANUS  What must I say?
"I pray, sir?"--plague upon 't! I cannot bring
My tongue to such a pace. "Look, sir, my wounds!
I got them in my country's service when
Some certain of your brethren roared and ran
From th' noise of our own drums."

MENENIUS  O me, the gods!
You must not speak of that. You must desire them
To think upon you.

CORIOLANUS  Think upon me? Hang 'em!
I would they would forget me, like the virtues
Which our divines lose by 'em.

MENENIUS  You'll mar all.
I'll leave you. Pray you, speak to 'em, I pray you,
In wholesome manner.	[He exits.]

CORIOLANUS  Bid them wash their faces
And keep their teeth clean.

[Enter three of the Citizens.]

So, here comes a brace.--
You know the cause, sir, of my standing here.

THIRD CITIZEN
We do, sir. Tell us what hath brought you to 't.

CORIOLANUS  Mine own desert.

SECOND CITIZEN  Your own desert?

CORIOLANUS  Ay, but not mine own desire.

THIRD CITIZEN  How, not your own desire?

CORIOLANUS  No, sir, 'twas never my desire yet to trouble
the poor with begging.

THIRD CITIZEN  You must think if we give you anything,
we hope to gain by you.

CORIOLANUS  Well then, I pray, your price o' th'
consulship?

FIRST CITIZEN  The price is to ask it kindly.

CORIOLANUS  Kindly, sir, I pray, let me ha 't. I have
wounds to show you, which shall be yours in
private.--Your good voice, sir. What say you?

SECOND CITIZEN  You shall ha 't, worthy sir.

CORIOLANUS  A match, sir. There's in all two worthy
voices begged. I have your alms. Adieu.

THIRD CITIZEN, [to the other Citizens]  But this is something
odd.

SECOND CITIZEN  An 'twere to give again--but 'tis no
matter.	[These citizens exit.]

[Enter two other Citizens.]


CORIOLANUS  Pray you now, if it may stand with the
tune of your voices that I may be consul, I have
here the customary gown.

FOURTH CITIZEN  You have deserved nobly of your
country, and you have not deserved nobly.

CORIOLANUS  Your enigma?

FOURTH CITIZEN  You have been a scourge to her enemies;
you have been a rod to her friends. You have
not indeed loved the common people.

CORIOLANUS  You should account me the more virtuous
that I have not been common in my love. I will, sir,
flatter my sworn brother, the people, to earn a
dearer estimation of them; 'tis a condition they account
gentle. And since the wisdom of their choice
is rather to have my hat than my heart, I will practice
the insinuating nod and be off to them most
counterfeitly. That is, sir, I will counterfeit the bewitchment
of some popular man and give it bountiful
to the desirers. Therefore, beseech you, I may
be consul.

FIFTH CITIZEN  We hope to find you our friend, and
therefore give you our voices heartily.

FOURTH CITIZEN  You have received many wounds for
your country.

CORIOLANUS  I will not seal your knowledge with showing
them. I will make much of your voices and so
trouble you no farther.

BOTH  The gods give you joy, sir, heartily.
[Citizens exit.]

CORIOLANUS  Most sweet voices!
Better it is to die, better to starve,
Than crave the hire which first we do deserve.
Why in this woolvish toge should I stand here
To beg of Hob and Dick that does appear
Their needless vouches? Custom calls me to 't.
What custom wills, in all things should we do 't?
The dust on antique time would lie unswept
And mountainous error be too highly heaped
For truth to o'erpeer. Rather than fool it so,
Let the high office and the honor go
To one that would do thus. I am half through;
The one part suffered, the other will I do.

[Enter three Citizens more.]

Here come more voices.--
Your voices! For your voices I have fought;
Watched for your voices; for your voices bear
Of wounds two dozen odd. Battles thrice six
I have seen and heard of; for your voices have
Done many things, some less, some more. Your
voices!
Indeed, I would be consul.

SIXTH CITIZEN  He has done nobly, and cannot go
without any honest man's voice.

SEVENTH CITIZEN  Therefore let him be consul. The
gods give him joy, and make him good friend to
the people!

ALL  Amen, amen. God save thee, noble consul.
[Citizens exit.]

CORIOLANUS  Worthy voices!

[Enter Menenius, with Brutus and Sicinius.]


MENENIUS
You have stood your limitation, and the Tribunes
Endue you with the people's voice. Remains
That in th' official marks invested, you
Anon do meet the Senate.

CORIOLANUS  Is this done?

SICINIUS
The custom of request you have discharged.
The people do admit you, and are summoned
To meet anon upon your approbation.

CORIOLANUS
Where? At the Senate House?

SICINIUS  There, Coriolanus.

CORIOLANUS
May I change these garments?

SICINIUS  You may, sir.

CORIOLANUS
That I'll straight do and, knowing myself again,
Repair to th' Senate House.

MENENIUS
I'll keep you company.--Will you along?

BRUTUS
We stay here for the people.

SICINIUS  Fare you well.
[Coriolanus and Menenius exit.]
He has it now; and by his looks, methinks,
'Tis warm at 's heart.

BRUTUS  With a proud heart he wore
His humble weeds. Will you dismiss the people?

[Enter the Plebeians.]


SICINIUS
How now, my masters, have you chose this man?

FIRST CITIZEN  He has our voices, sir.

BRUTUS
We pray the gods he may deserve your loves.

SECOND CITIZEN
Amen, sir. To my poor unworthy notice,
He mocked us when he begged our voices.

THIRD CITIZEN
Certainly, he flouted us downright.

FIRST CITIZEN
No, 'tis his kind of speech. He did not mock us.

SECOND CITIZEN
Not one amongst us, save yourself, but says
He used us scornfully. He should have showed us
His marks of merit, wounds received for 's country.

SICINIUS  Why, so he did, I am sure.

ALL  No, no. No man saw 'em.

THIRD CITIZEN
He said he had wounds, which he could show in
private,
And with his hat, thus waving it in scorn,
"I would be consul," says he. "Aged custom,
But by your voices, will not so permit me;
Your voices therefore." When we granted that,
Here was "I thank you for your voices. Thank you.
Your most sweet voices! Now you have left your
voices,
I have no further with you." Was not this mockery?

SICINIUS
Why either were you ignorant to see 't
Or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness
To yield your voices?

BRUTUS  Could you not have told him
As you were lessoned? When he had no power,
But was a petty servant to the state,
He was your enemy, ever spake against
Your liberties and the charters that you bear
I' th' body of the weal; and, now arriving
A place of potency and sway o' th' state,
If he should still malignantly remain
Fast foe to th' plebeii, your voices might
Be curses to yourselves. You should have said
That as his worthy deeds did claim no less
Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature
Would think upon you for your voices, and
Translate his malice towards you into love,
Standing your friendly lord.

SICINIUS  Thus to have said,
As you were fore-advised, had touched his spirit
And tried his inclination; from him plucked
Either his gracious promise, which you might,
As cause had called you up, have held him to;
Or else it would have galled his surly nature,
Which easily endures not article
Tying him to aught. So putting him to rage,
You should have ta'en th' advantage of his choler
And passed him unelected.

BRUTUS  Did you perceive
He did solicit you in free contempt
When he did need your loves, and do you think
That his contempt shall not be bruising to you
When he hath power to crush? Why, had your
bodies
No heart among you? Or had you tongues to cry
Against the rectorship of judgment?

SICINIUS
Have you ere now denied the asker? And now
Again, of him that did not ask but mock,
Bestow your sued-for tongues?

THIRD CITIZEN  He's not confirmed.
We may deny him yet.

SECOND CITIZEN  And will deny him.
I'll have five hundred voices of that sound.

FIRST CITIZEN
I twice five hundred, and their friends to piece 'em.

BRUTUS
Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends
They have chose a consul that will from them take
Their liberties, make them of no more voice
Than dogs that are as often beat for barking
As therefor kept to do so.

SICINIUS  Let them assemble
And, on a safer judgment, all revoke
Your ignorant election. Enforce his pride
And his old hate unto you. Besides, forget not
With what contempt he wore the humble weed,
How in his suit he scorned you; but your loves,
Thinking upon his services, took from you
Th' apprehension of his present portance,
Which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion
After the inveterate hate he bears you.

BRUTUS  Lay
A fault on us, your tribunes, that we labored,
No impediment between, but that you must
Cast your election on him.

SICINIUS  Say you chose him
More after our commandment than as guided
By your own true affections, and that your minds,
Preoccupied with what you rather must do
Than what you should, made you against the grain
To voice him consul. Lay the fault on us.

BRUTUS
Ay, spare us not. Say we read lectures to you,
How youngly he began to serve his country,
How long continued, and what stock he springs of,
The noble house o' th' Martians, from whence came
That Ancus Martius, Numa's daughter's son,
Who after great Hostilius here was king,
Of the same house Publius and Quintus were,
That our best water brought by conduits hither;
And Censorinus, that was so surnamed,
And nobly named so, twice being censor,
Was his great ancestor.

SICINIUS  One thus descended,
That hath besides well in his person wrought
To be set high in place, we did commend
To your remembrances; but you have found,
Scaling his present bearing with his past,
That he's your fixed enemy, and revoke
Your sudden approbation.

BRUTUS  Say you ne'er had done 't--
Harp on that still--but by our putting on.
And presently, when you have drawn your number,
Repair to th' Capitol.

ALL  We will so. Almost all
Repent in their election.	[Plebeians exit.]

BRUTUS  Let them go on.
This mutiny were better put in hazard
Than stay, past doubt, for greater.
If, as his nature is, he fall in rage
With their refusal, both observe and answer
The vantage of his anger.

SICINIUS  To th' Capitol, come.
We will be there before the stream o' th' people,
And this shall seem, as partly 'tis, their own,
Which we have goaded onward.
[They exit.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Cornets. Enter Coriolanus, Menenius, all the Gentry,
Cominius, Titus Lartius, and other Senators.]


CORIOLANUS
Tullus Aufidius then had made new head?

LARTIUS
He had, my lord, and that it was which caused
Our swifter composition.

CORIOLANUS
So then the Volsces stand but as at first,
Ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road
Upon 's again.

COMINIUS  They are worn, lord consul, so,
That we shall hardly in our ages see
Their banners wave again.

CORIOLANUS  Saw you Aufidius?

LARTIUS
On safeguard he came to me, and did curse
Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely
Yielded the town. He is retired to Antium.

CORIOLANUS
Spoke he of me?

LARTIUS  He did, my lord.

CORIOLANUS  How? What?

LARTIUS
How often he had met you sword to sword;
That of all things upon the earth he hated
Your person most; that he would pawn his fortunes
To hopeless restitution, so he might
Be called your vanquisher.

CORIOLANUS  At Antium lives he?

LARTIUS  At Antium.

CORIOLANUS
I wish I had a cause to seek him there,
To oppose his hatred fully. Welcome home.

[Enter Sicinius and Brutus.]

Behold, these are the tribunes of the people,
The tongues o' th' common mouth. I do despise
them,
For they do prank them in authority
Against all noble sufferance.

SICINIUS  Pass no further.

CORIOLANUS  Ha? What is that?

BRUTUS
It will be dangerous to go on. No further.

CORIOLANUS  What makes this change?

MENENIUS  The matter?

COMINIUS
Hath he not passed the noble and the common?

BRUTUS
Cominius, no.

CORIOLANUS  Have I had children's voices?

FIRST SENATOR
Tribunes, give way. He shall to th' marketplace.

BRUTUS
The people are incensed against him.

SICINIUS  Stop,
Or all will fall in broil.

CORIOLANUS  Are these your herd?
Must these have voices, that can yield them now
And straight disclaim their tongues? What are your
offices?
You being their mouths, why rule you not their
teeth?
Have you not set them on?

MENENIUS  Be calm, be calm.

CORIOLANUS
It is a purposed thing, and grows by plot,
To curb the will of the nobility.
Suffer 't, and live with such as cannot rule
Nor ever will be ruled.

BRUTUS  Call 't not a plot.
The people cry you mocked them; and, of late,
When corn was given them gratis, you repined,
Scandaled the suppliants for the people, called them
Timepleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.

CORIOLANUS
Why, this was known before.

BRUTUS  Not to them all.

CORIOLANUS
Have you informed them sithence?

BRUTUS  How? I inform
them?

COMINIUS  You are like to do such business.

BRUTUS
Not unlike, each way, to better yours.

CORIOLANUS
Why then should I be consul? By yond clouds,
Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me
Your fellow tribune.

SICINIUS  You show too much of that
For which the people stir. If you will pass
To where you are bound, you must inquire your
way,
Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit,
Or never be so noble as a consul,
Nor yoke with him for tribune.

MENENIUS  Let's be calm.

COMINIUS
The people are abused, set on. This palt'ring
Becomes not Rome, nor has Coriolanus
Deserved this so dishonored rub, laid falsely
I' th' plain way of his merit.

CORIOLANUS  Tell me of corn?
This was my speech, and I will speak 't again.

MENENIUS
Not now, not now.

FIRST SENATOR  Not in this heat, sir, now.

CORIOLANUS  Now, as I live, I will.
My nobler friends, I crave their pardons. For
The mutable, rank-scented meiny, let them
Regard me, as I do not flatter, and
Therein behold themselves. I say again,
In soothing them, we nourish 'gainst our senate
The cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition,
Which we ourselves have plowed for, sowed, and
scattered
By mingling them with us, the honored number,
Who lack not virtue, no, nor power, but that
Which they have given to beggars.

MENENIUS  Well, no more.

FIRST SENATOR
No more words, we beseech you.

CORIOLANUS  How? No more?
As for my country I have shed my blood,
Not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs
Coin words till their decay against those measles
Which we disdain should tetter us, yet sought
The very way to catch them.

BRUTUS  You speak o' th' people
As if you were a god to punish, not
A man of their infirmity.

SICINIUS  'Twere well
We let the people know 't.

MENENIUS  What, what? His choler?

CORIOLANUS  Choler?
Were I as patient as the midnight sleep,
By Jove, 'twould be my mind.

SICINIUS  It is a mind
That shall remain a poison where it is,
Not poison any further.

CORIOLANUS  "Shall remain"?
Hear you this Triton of the minnows? Mark you
His absolute "shall"?

COMINIUS  'Twas from the canon.

CORIOLANUS  "Shall"?
O good but most unwise patricians, why,
You grave but reckless senators, have you thus
Given Hydra here to choose an officer,
That with his peremptory "shall," being but
The horn and noise o' th' monster's, wants not spirit
To say he'll turn your current in a ditch
And make your channel his? If he have power,
Then vail your ignorance; if none, awake
Your dangerous lenity. If you are learned,
Be not as common fools; if you are not,
Let them have cushions by you. You are plebeians,
If they be senators; and they are no less
When, both your voices blended, the great'st taste
Most palates theirs. They choose their magistrate,
And such a one as he, who puts his "shall,"
His popular "shall," against a graver bench
Than ever frowned in Greece. By Jove himself,
It makes the consuls base! And my soul aches
To know, when two authorities are up,
Neither supreme, how soon confusion
May enter 'twixt the gap of both and take
The one by th' other.

COMINIUS  Well, on to th' marketplace.

CORIOLANUS
Whoever gave that counsel to give forth
The corn o' th' storehouse gratis, as 'twas used
Sometime in Greece--

MENENIUS  Well, well, no more of that.

CORIOLANUS
Though there the people had more absolute power,
I say they nourished disobedience, fed
The ruin of the state.

BRUTUS  Why shall the people give
One that speaks thus their voice?

CORIOLANUS  I'll give my reasons,
More worthier than their voices. They know the
corn
Was not our recompense, resting well assured
They ne'er did service for 't. Being pressed to th' war,
Even when the navel of the state was touched,
They would not thread the gates. This kind of
service
Did not deserve corn gratis. Being i' th' war,
Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they showed
Most valor, spoke not for them. Th' accusation
Which they have often made against the Senate,
All cause unborn, could never be the native
Of our so frank donation. Well, what then?
How shall this bosom multiplied digest
The Senate's courtesy? Let deeds express
What's like to be their words: "We did request it;
We are the greater poll, and in true fear
They gave us our demands." Thus we debase
The nature of our seats and make the rabble
Call our cares fears, which will in time
Break ope the locks o' th' Senate and bring in
The crows to peck the eagles.

MENENIUS  Come, enough.

BRUTUS
Enough, with over-measure.

CORIOLANUS  No, take more!
What may be sworn by, both divine and human,
Seal what I end withal! This double worship--
Where one part does disdain with cause, the other
Insult without all reason, where gentry, title,
wisdom
Cannot conclude but by the yea and no
Of general ignorance--it must omit
Real necessities and give way the while
To unstable slightness. Purpose so barred, it follows
Nothing is done to purpose. Therefore, beseech
you--
You that will be less fearful than discreet,
That love the fundamental part of state
More than you doubt the change on 't, that prefer
A noble life before a long, and wish
To jump a body with a dangerous physic
That's sure of death without it--at once pluck out
The multitudinous tongue; let them not lick
The sweet which is their poison. Your dishonor
Mangles true judgment and bereaves the state
Of that integrity which should become 't,
Not having the power to do the good it would
For th' ill which doth control 't.

BRUTUS  'Has said enough.

SICINIUS
'Has spoken like a traitor and shall answer
As traitors do.

CORIOLANUS  Thou wretch, despite o'erwhelm thee!
What should the people do with these bald tribunes,
On whom depending, their obedience fails
To th' greater bench? In a rebellion,
When what's not meet but what must be was law,
Then were they chosen. In a better hour,
Let what is meet be said it must be meet,
And throw their power i' th' dust.

BRUTUS  Manifest treason.

SICINIUS  This a consul? No.

BRUTUS  The aediles, ho! Let him be apprehended.

[Enter an Aedile.]


SICINIUS
Go, call the people; [Aedile exits.] in whose name
myself
Attach thee as a traitorous innovator,
A foe to th' public weal. Obey, I charge thee,
And follow to thine answer.

CORIOLANUS  Hence, old goat.

ALL PATRICIANS
We'll surety him.

COMINIUS, [to Sicinius]  Aged sir, hands off.

CORIOLANUS, [to Sicinius]
Hence, rotten thing, or I shall shake thy bones
Out of thy garments.

SICINIUS  Help, you citizens!

[Enter a rabble of Plebeians with the Aediles.]


MENENIUS  On both sides more respect!

SICINIUS
Here's he that would take from you all your power.

BRUTUS  Seize him, aediles.

ALL PLEBEIANS  Down with him, down with him!

SECOND SENATOR  Weapons, weapons, weapons!
[They all bustle about Coriolanus.]
Tribunes, patricians, citizens, what ho!
Sicinius, Brutus, Coriolanus, citizens!

ALL  Peace, peace, peace! Stay, hold, peace!

MENENIUS
What is about to be? I am out of breath.
Confusion's near. I cannot speak. You, tribunes
To th' people!--Coriolanus, patience!--
Speak, good Sicinius.

SICINIUS  Hear me, people! Peace!

ALL PLEBEIANS
Let's hear our tribune. Peace! Speak, speak, speak.

SICINIUS
You are at point to lose your liberties.
Martius would have all from you, Martius,
Whom late you have named for consul.

MENENIUS  Fie, fie, fie!
This is the way to kindle, not to quench.

FIRST SENATOR
To unbuild the city and to lay all flat.

SICINIUS
What is the city but the people?

ALL PLEBEIANS  True,
The people are the city.

BRUTUS
By the consent of all, we were established
The people's magistrates.

ALL PLEBEIANS  You so remain.

MENENIUS  And so are like to do.

CORIOLANUS
That is the way to lay the city flat,
To bring the roof to the foundation
And bury all which yet distinctly ranges
In heaps and piles of ruin.

SICINIUS  This deserves death.

BRUTUS
Or let us stand to our authority
Or let us lose it. We do here pronounce,
Upon the part o' th' people, in whose power
We were elected theirs, Martius is worthy
Of present death.

SICINIUS  Therefore lay hold of him,
Bear him to th' rock Tarpeian, and from thence
Into destruction cast him.

BRUTUS  Aediles, seize him!

ALL PLEBEIANS
Yield, Martius, yield!

MENENIUS  Hear me one word.
Beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word.

AEDILES  Peace, peace!

MENENIUS
Be that you seem, truly your country's friend,
And temp'rately proceed to what you would
Thus violently redress.

BRUTUS  Sir, those cold ways,
That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous
Where the disease is violent.--Lay hands upon him,
And bear him to the rock.
[Coriolanus draws his sword.]

CORIOLANUS  No, I'll die here.
There's some among you have beheld me fighting.
Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.

MENENIUS
Down with that sword!--Tribunes, withdraw awhile.

BRUTUS
Lay hands upon him!

MENENIUS  Help Martius, help!
You that be noble, help him, young and old!

ALL PLEBEIANS  Down with him, down with him!

[In this mutiny, the Tribunes, the Aediles, and the People
are beat in.]


MENENIUS, [to Coriolanus]
Go, get you to your house. Begone, away.
All will be naught else.

SECOND SENATOR  Get you gone.

CORIOLANUS  Stand fast!
We have as many friends as enemies.

MENENIUS
Shall it be put to that?

FIRST SENATOR  The gods forbid!--
I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house;
Leave us to cure this cause.

MENENIUS  For 'tis a sore upon us
You cannot tent yourself. Begone, beseech you.

COMINIUS  Come, sir, along with us.

CORIOLANUS
I would they were barbarians, as they are,
Though in Rome littered; not Romans, as they are
not,
Though calved i' th' porch o' th' Capitol.

MENENIUS  Begone!
Put not your worthy rage into your tongue.
One time will owe another.

CORIOLANUS  On fair ground
I could beat forty of them.

MENENIUS  I could myself
Take up a brace o' th' best of them, yea, the two
tribunes.

COMINIUS
But now 'tis odds beyond arithmetic,
And manhood is called foolery when it stands
Against a falling fabric. [To Coriolanus.] Will you
hence,
Before the tag return, whose rage doth rend
Like interrupted waters and o'erbear
What they are used to bear?

MENENIUS, [to Coriolanus]  Pray you, begone.
I'll try whether my old wit be in request
With those that have but little. This must be patched
With cloth of any color.

COMINIUS  Nay, come away.
[Coriolanus and Cominius exit.]

PATRICIAN  This man has marred his fortune.

MENENIUS
His nature is too noble for the world.
He would not flatter Neptune for his trident
Or Jove for 's power to thunder. His heart's his
mouth;
What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent,
And, being angry, does forget that ever
He heard the name of death.	[A noise within.]
Here's goodly work.

PATRICIAN  I would they were abed!

MENENIUS
I would they were in Tiber. What the vengeance,
Could he not speak 'em fair?

[Enter Brutus and Sicinius with the rabble again.]


SICINIUS  Where is this viper
That would depopulate the city and
Be every man himself?

MENENIUS  You worthy tribunes--

SICINIUS
He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock
With rigorous hands. He hath resisted law,
And therefore law shall scorn him further trial
Than the severity of the public power
Which he so sets at naught.

FIRST CITIZEN  He shall well know
The noble tribunes are the people's mouths
And we their hands.

ALL PLEBEIANS  He shall, sure on 't.

MENENIUS  Sir, sir--

SICINIUS  Peace!

MENENIUS
Do not cry havoc where you should but hunt
With modest warrant.

SICINIUS  Sir, how comes 't that you
Have holp to make this rescue?

MENENIUS  Hear me speak.
As I do know the Consul's worthiness,
So can I name his faults.

SICINIUS  Consul? What consul?

MENENIUS  The consul Coriolanus.

BRUTUS  He consul?

ALL PLEBEIANS  No, no, no, no, no!

MENENIUS
If, by the Tribunes' leave, and yours, good people,
I may be heard, I would crave a word or two,
The which shall turn you to no further harm
Than so much loss of time.

SICINIUS  Speak briefly then,
For we are peremptory to dispatch
This viperous traitor. To eject him hence
Were but one danger, and to keep him here
Our certain death. Therefore it is decreed
He dies tonight.

MENENIUS  Now the good gods forbid
That our renowned Rome, whose gratitude
Towards her deserved children is enrolled
In Jove's own book, like an unnatural dam
Should now eat up her own.

SICINIUS
He's a disease that must be cut away.

MENENIUS
O, he's a limb that has but a disease--
Mortal to cut it off; to cure it easy.
What has he done to Rome that's worthy death?
Killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost--
Which I dare vouch is more than that he hath
By many an ounce--he dropped it for his country;
And what is left, to lose it by his country
Were to us all that do 't and suffer it
A brand to th' end o' th' world.

SICINIUS  This is clean cam.

BRUTUS
Merely awry. When he did love his country,
It honored him.

SICINIUS  The service of the foot,
Being once gangrened, is not then respected
For what before it was.

BRUTUS  We'll hear no more.
Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence,
Lest his infection, being of catching nature,
Spread further.

MENENIUS  One word more, one word!
This tiger-footed rage, when it shall find
The harm of unscanned swiftness, will too late
Tie leaden pounds to 's heels. Proceed by process,
Lest parties--as he is beloved--break out
And sack great Rome with Romans.

BRUTUS  If it were so--

SICINIUS  What do you talk?
Have we not had a taste of his obedience?
Our aediles smote! Ourselves resisted! Come.

MENENIUS
Consider this: he has been bred i' th' wars
Since he could draw a sword, and is ill schooled
In bolted language; meal and bran together
He throws without distinction. Give me leave,
I'll go to him and undertake to bring him
Where he shall answer by a lawful form,
In peace, to his utmost peril.

FIRST SENATOR  Noble tribunes,
It is the humane way: the other course
Will prove too bloody, and the end of it
Unknown to the beginning.

SICINIUS  Noble Menenius,
Be you then as the people's officer.--
Masters, lay down your weapons.

BRUTUS  Go not home.

SICINIUS
Meet on the marketplace. [To Menenius.] We'll
attend you there,
Where if you bring not Martius, we'll proceed
In our first way.

MENENIUS  I'll bring him to you.
[To Senators.] Let me desire your company. He must
come,
Or what is worst will follow.

FIRST SENATOR  Pray you, let's to him.
[All exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Coriolanus with Nobles.]


CORIOLANUS
Let them pull all about mine ears, present me
Death on the wheel or at wild horses' heels,
Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock,
That the precipitation might down stretch
Below the beam of sight, yet will I still
Be thus to them.

NOBLE  You do the nobler.

CORIOLANUS  I muse my mother
Does not approve me further, who was wont
To call them woolen vassals, things created
To buy and sell with groats, to show bare heads
In congregations, to yawn, be still, and wonder
When one but of my ordinance stood up
To speak of peace or war.

[Enter Volumnia.]

I talk of you.
Why did you wish me milder? Would you have me
False to my nature? Rather say I play
The man I am.

VOLUMNIA  O sir, sir, sir,
I would have had you put your power well on
Before you had worn it out.

CORIOLANUS  Let go.

VOLUMNIA
You might have been enough the man you are
With striving less to be so. Lesser had been
The thwartings of your dispositions if
You had not showed them how you were disposed
Ere they lacked power to cross you.

CORIOLANUS  Let them hang!

VOLUMNIA  Ay, and burn too.

[Enter Menenius with the Senators.]


MENENIUS, [to Coriolanus]
Come, come, you have been too rough, something
too rough.
You must return and mend it.

FIRST SENATOR  There's no remedy,
Unless, by not so doing, our good city
Cleave in the midst and perish.

VOLUMNIA  Pray be counseled.
I have a heart as little apt as yours,
But yet a brain that leads my use of anger
To better vantage.

MENENIUS  Well said, noble woman.
Before he should thus stoop to th' herd--but that
The violent fit o' th' time craves it as physic
For the whole state--I would put mine armor on,
Which I can scarcely bear.

CORIOLANUS  What must I do?

MENENIUS
Return to th' Tribunes.

CORIOLANUS  Well, what then? What then?

MENENIUS  Repent what you have spoke.

CORIOLANUS
For them? I cannot do it to the gods.
Must I then do 't to them?

VOLUMNIA  You are too absolute,
Though therein you can never be too noble
But when extremities speak. I have heard you say
Honor and policy, like unsevered friends,
I' th' war do grow together. Grant that, and tell me
In peace what each of them by th' other lose
That they combine not there?

CORIOLANUS  Tush, tush!

MENENIUS  A good
demand.

VOLUMNIA
If it be honor in your wars to seem
The same you are not, which for your best ends
You adopt your policy, how is it less or worse
That it shall hold companionship in peace
With honor as in war, since that to both
It stands in like request?

CORIOLANUS  Why force you this?

VOLUMNIA
Because that now it lies you on to speak
To th' people, not by your own instruction,
Nor by th' matter which your heart prompts you,
But with such words that are but roted in
Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables
Of no allowance to your bosom's truth.
Now, this no more dishonors you at all
Than to take in a town with gentle words,
Which else would put you to your fortune and
The hazard of much blood.
I would dissemble with my nature where
My fortunes and my friends at stake required
I should do so in honor. I am in this
Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles;
And you will rather show our general louts
How you can frown than spend a fawn upon 'em
For the inheritance of their loves and safeguard
Of what that want might ruin.

MENENIUS  Noble lady!--
Come, go with us; speak fair. You may salve so,
Not what is dangerous present, but the loss
Of what is past.

VOLUMNIA  I prithee now, my son,
Go to them with this bonnet in thy hand,
And thus far having stretched it--here be with
them--
Thy knee bussing the stones--for in such business
Action is eloquence, and the eyes of th' ignorant
More learned than the ears--waving thy head,
Which often thus correcting thy stout heart,
Now humble as the ripest mulberry
That will not hold the handling. Or say to them
Thou art their soldier and, being bred in broils,
Hast not the soft way, which thou dost confess
Were fit for thee to use as they to claim,
In asking their good loves; but thou wilt frame
Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far
As thou hast power and person.

MENENIUS  This but done
Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours;
For they have pardons, being asked, as free
As words to little purpose.

VOLUMNIA  Prithee now,
Go, and be ruled; although I know thou hadst rather
Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf
Than flatter him in a bower.

[Enter Cominius.]

Here is Cominius.

COMINIUS
I have been i' th' marketplace; and, sir, 'tis fit
You make strong party or defend yourself
By calmness or by absence. All's in anger.

MENENIUS
Only fair speech.

COMINIUS  I think 'twill serve, if he
Can thereto frame his spirit.

VOLUMNIA  He must, and will.--
Prithee, now, say you will, and go about it.

CORIOLANUS
Must I go show them my unbarbed sconce? Must I
With my base tongue give to my noble heart
A lie that it must bear? Well, I will do 't.
Yet, were there but this single plot to lose,
This mold of Martius, they to dust should grind it
And throw 't against the wind. To th' marketplace!
You have put me now to such a part which never
I shall discharge to th' life.

COMINIUS  Come, come, we'll prompt
you.

VOLUMNIA
I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said
My praises made thee first a soldier, so,
To have my praise for this, perform a part
Thou hast not done before.

CORIOLANUS  Well, I must do 't.
Away, my disposition, and possess me
Some harlot's spirit! My throat of war be turned,
Which choired with my drum, into a pipe
Small as an eunuch or the virgin voice
That babies lull asleep! The smiles of knaves
Tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys' tears take up
The glasses of my sight! A beggar's tongue
Make motion through my lips, and my armed knees,
Who bowed but in my stirrup, bend like his
That hath received an alms. I will not do 't,
Lest I surcease to honor mine own truth
And, by my body's action, teach my mind
A most inherent baseness.

VOLUMNIA  At thy choice, then.
To beg of thee, it is my more dishonor
Than thou of them. Come all to ruin. Let
Thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear
Thy dangerous stoutness, for I mock at death
With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list.
Thy valiantness was mine; thou suck'st it from me,
But owe thy pride thyself.

CORIOLANUS  Pray be content.
Mother, I am going to the marketplace.
Chide me no more. I'll mountebank their loves,
Cog their hearts from them, and come home
beloved
Of all the trades in Rome. Look, I am going.
Commend me to my wife. I'll return consul,
Or never trust to what my tongue can do
I' th' way of flattery further.

VOLUMNIA  Do your will.
[Volumnia exits.]

COMINIUS
Away! The Tribunes do attend you. Arm yourself
To answer mildly, for they are prepared
With accusations, as I hear, more strong
Than are upon you yet.

CORIOLANUS
The word is "mildly." Pray you, let us go.
Let them accuse me by invention, I
Will answer in mine honor.

MENENIUS  Ay, but mildly.

CORIOLANUS  Well, mildly be it, then. Mildly.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Sicinius and Brutus.]


BRUTUS
In this point charge him home, that he affects
Tyrannical power. If he evade us there,
Enforce him with his envy to the people,
And that the spoil got on the Antiates
Was ne'er distributed.

[Enter an Aedile.]

What, will he come?

AEDILE  He's coming.

BRUTUS  How accompanied?

AEDILE
With old Menenius, and those senators
That always favored him.

SICINIUS  Have you a catalogue
Of all the voices that we have procured,
Set down by th' poll?

AEDILE  I have. 'Tis ready.

SICINIUS
Have you collected them by tribes?

AEDILE  I have.

SICINIUS
Assemble presently the people hither;
And when they hear me say "It shall be so
I' th' right and strength o' th' commons," be it either
For death, for fine, or banishment, then let them
If I say "Fine," cry "Fine," if "Death," cry "Death,"
Insisting on the old prerogative
And power i' th' truth o' th' cause.

AEDILE  I shall inform them.

BRUTUS
And when such time they have begun to cry,
Let them not cease, but with a din confused
Enforce the present execution
Of what we chance to sentence.

AEDILE  Very well.

SICINIUS
Make them be strong and ready for this hint
When we shall hap to give 't them.

BRUTUS  Go about it.
[Aedile exits.]
Put him to choler straight. He hath been used
Ever to conquer and to have his worth
Of contradiction. Being once chafed, he cannot
Be reined again to temperance; then he speaks
What's in his heart, and that is there which looks
With us to break his neck.

[Enter Coriolanus, Menenius, and Cominius, with
others (Senators).]


SICINIUS  Well, here he comes.

MENENIUS, [aside to Coriolanus]  Calmly, I do beseech
you.

CORIOLANUS, [aside to Menenius]
Ay, as an hostler that for th' poorest piece
Will bear the knave by th' volume.--Th' honored
gods
Keep Rome in safety and the chairs of justice
Supplied with worthy men! Plant love among 's!
Throng our large temples with the shows of peace
And not our streets with war!

FIRST SENATOR  Amen, amen.

MENENIUS  A noble wish.

[Enter the Aedile with the Plebeians.]


SICINIUS  Draw near, you people.

AEDILE
List to your tribunes. Audience! Peace, I say!

CORIOLANUS  First, hear me speak.

BOTH TRIBUNES  Well, say.--Peace, ho!

CORIOLANUS
Shall I be charged no further than this present?
Must all determine here?

SICINIUS  I do demand
If you submit you to the people's voices,
Allow their officers, and are content
To suffer lawful censure for such faults
As shall be proved upon you.

CORIOLANUS  I am content.

MENENIUS
Lo, citizens, he says he is content.
The warlike service he has done, consider. Think
Upon the wounds his body bears, which show
Like graves i' th' holy churchyard.

CORIOLANUS  Scratches with
briars,
Scars to move laughter only.

MENENIUS  Consider further,
That when he speaks not like a citizen,
You find him like a soldier. Do not take
His rougher accents for malicious sounds,
But, as I say, such as become a soldier
Rather than envy you.

COMINIUS  Well, well, no more.

CORIOLANUS  What is the matter,
That, being passed for consul with full voice,
I am so dishonored that the very hour
You take it off again?

SICINIUS  Answer to us.

CORIOLANUS  Say then. 'Tis true, I ought so.

SICINIUS
We charge you that you have contrived to take
From Rome all seasoned office and to wind
Yourself into a power tyrannical,
For which you are a traitor to the people.

CORIOLANUS
How? Traitor?

MENENIUS  Nay, temperately! Your promise.

CORIOLANUS
The fires i' th' lowest hell fold in the people!
Call me their traitor? Thou injurious tribune!
Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths,
In thy hands clutched as many millions, in
Thy lying tongue both numbers, I would say
"Thou liest" unto thee with a voice as free
As I do pray the gods.

SICINIUS  Mark you this, people?

ALL PLEBEIANS  To th' rock, to th' rock with him!

SICINIUS  Peace!
We need not put new matter to his charge.
What you have seen him do and heard him speak,
Beating your officers, cursing yourselves,
Opposing laws with strokes, and here defying
Those whose great power must try him--even this,
So criminal and in such capital kind,
Deserves th' extremest death.

BRUTUS  But since he hath
Served well for Rome--

CORIOLANUS  What do you prate of service?

BRUTUS  I talk of that that know it.

CORIOLANUS  You?

MENENIUS
Is this the promise that you made your mother?

COMINIUS  Know, I pray you--

CORIOLANUS  I'll know no further.
Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death,
Vagabond exile, flaying, pent to linger
But with a grain a day, I would not buy
Their mercy at the price of one fair word,
Nor check my courage for what they can give,
To have 't with saying "Good morrow."

SICINIUS  For that he has,
As much as in him lies, from time to time
Envied against the people, seeking means
To pluck away their power, as now at last
Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence
Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers
That doth distribute it, in the name o' th' people
And in the power of us the Tribunes, we,
Even from this instant, banish him our city
In peril of precipitation
From off the rock Tarpeian, never more
To enter our Rome gates. I' th' people's name,
I say it shall be so.

ALL PLEBEIANS
It shall be so, it shall be so! Let him away!
He's banished, and it shall be so.

COMINIUS
Hear me, my masters and my common friends--

SICINIUS
He's sentenced. No more hearing.

COMINIUS  Let me speak.
I have been consul and can show for Rome
Her enemies' marks upon me. I do love
My country's good with a respect more tender,
More holy and profound, than mine own life,
My dear wife's estimate, her womb's increase,
And treasure of my loins. Then if I would
Speak that--

SICINIUS  We know your drift. Speak what?

BRUTUS
There's no more to be said, but he is banished
As enemy to the people and his country.
It shall be so.

ALL PLEBEIANS  It shall be so, it shall be so!

CORIOLANUS
You common cry of curs, whose breath I hate
As reek o' th' rotten fens, whose loves I prize
As the dead carcasses of unburied men
That do corrupt my air, I banish you!
And here remain with your uncertainty;
Let every feeble rumor shake your hearts;
Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes,
Fan you into despair! Have the power still
To banish your defenders, till at length
Your ignorance--which finds not till it feels,
Making but reservation of yourselves,
Still your own foes--deliver you
As most abated captives to some nation
That won you without blows! Despising
For you the city, thus I turn my back.
There is a world elsewhere.
[Coriolanus, Cominius, with others (Senators) exit.]

AEDILE
The people's enemy is gone, is gone.

ALL PLEBEIANS
Our enemy is banished; he is gone. Hoo, hoo!
[They all shout and throw up their caps.]

SICINIUS
Go see him out at gates, and follow him,
As he hath followed you, with all despite.
Give him deserved vexation. Let a guard
Attend us through the city.

ALL PLEBEIANS
Come, come, let's see him out at gates! Come!
The gods preserve our noble tribunes! Come!
[They exit.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Coriolanus, Volumnia, Virgilia, Menenius,
Cominius, with the young nobility of Rome.]


CORIOLANUS
Come, leave your tears. A brief farewell. The beast
With many heads butts me away. Nay, mother,
Where is your ancient courage? You were used
To say extremities was the trier of spirits;
That common chances common men could bear;
That when the sea was calm, all boats alike
Showed mastership in floating; fortune's blows
When most struck home, being gentle wounded
craves
A noble cunning. You were used to load me
With precepts that would make invincible
The heart that conned them.

VIRGILIA
O heavens! O heavens!

CORIOLANUS  Nay, I prithee,
woman--

VOLUMNIA
Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome,
And occupations perish!

CORIOLANUS  What, what, what!
I shall be loved when I am lacked. Nay, mother,
Resume that spirit when you were wont to say
If you had been the wife of Hercules,
Six of his labors you'd have done and saved
Your husband so much sweat.--Cominius,
Droop not. Adieu.--Farewell, my wife, my mother.
I'll do well yet.--Thou old and true Menenius,
Thy tears are salter than a younger man's
And venomous to thine eyes.--My sometime
general,
I have seen thee stern, and thou hast oft beheld
Heart-hard'ning spectacles. Tell these sad women
'Tis fond to wail inevitable strokes
As 'tis to laugh at 'em.--My mother, you wot well
My hazards still have been your solace, and--
Believe 't not lightly--though I go alone,
Like to a lonely dragon that his fen
Makes feared and talked of more than seen, your
son
Will or exceed the common or be caught
With cautelous baits and practice.

VOLUMNIA  My first son,
Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius
With thee awhile. Determine on some course
More than a wild exposure to each chance
That starts i' th' way before thee.

VIRGILIA  O the gods!

COMINIUS
I'll follow thee a month, devise with thee
Where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us
And we of thee; so if the time thrust forth
A cause for thy repeal, we shall not send
O'er the vast world to seek a single man
And lose advantage, which doth ever cool
I' th' absence of the needer.

CORIOLANUS  Fare you well.
Thou hast years upon thee, and thou art too full
Of the wars' surfeits to go rove with one
That's yet unbruised. Bring me but out at gate.--
Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and
My friends of noble touch. When I am forth,
Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you, come.
While I remain above the ground, you shall
Hear from me still, and never of me aught
But what is like me formerly.

MENENIUS  That's worthily
As any ear can hear. Come, let's not weep.
If I could shake off but one seven years
From these old arms and legs, by the good gods,
I'd with thee every foot.

CORIOLANUS  Give me thy hand.
Come.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter the two Tribunes, Sicinius, and Brutus,
with the Aedile.]


SICINIUS
Bid them all home. He's gone, and we'll no further.
The nobility are vexed, whom we see have sided
In his behalf.

BRUTUS  Now we have shown our power,
Let us seem humbler after it is done
Than when it was a-doing.

SICINIUS  Bid them home.
Say their great enemy is gone, and they
Stand in their ancient strength.

BRUTUS  Dismiss them home.
[Aedile exits.]
Here comes his mother.

[Enter Volumnia, Virgilia, and Menenius.]


SICINIUS  Let's not meet her.

BRUTUS  Why?

SICINIUS  They say she's mad.

BRUTUS
They have ta'en note of us. Keep on your way.

VOLUMNIA
O, you're well met. The hoarded plague o' th' gods
Requite your love!

MENENIUS  Peace, peace! Be not so loud.

VOLUMNIA, [to the Tribunes]
If that I could for weeping, you should hear--
Nay, and you shall hear some. [(To Sicinius.)] Will
you be gone?

VIRGILIA, [to Brutus]
You shall stay too. I would I had the power
To say so to my husband.

SICINIUS, [to Volumnia]  Are you mankind?

VOLUMNIA
Ay, fool, is that a shame? Note but this, fool.
Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship
To banish him that struck more blows for Rome
Than thou hast spoken words?

SICINIUS  O blessed heavens!

VOLUMNIA
More noble blows than ever thou wise words,
And for Rome's good. I'll tell thee what--yet go.
Nay, but thou shalt stay too. I would my son
Were in Arabia and thy tribe before him,
His good sword in his hand.

SICINIUS  What then?

VIRGILIA  What then?
He'd make an end of thy posterity.

VOLUMNIA  Bastards and all.
Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!

MENENIUS  Come, come, peace.

SICINIUS
I would he had continued to his country
As he began, and not unknit himself
The noble knot he made.

BRUTUS  I would he had.

VOLUMNIA
"I would he had"? 'Twas you incensed the rabble.
Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth
As I can of those mysteries which heaven
Will not have Earth to know.

BRUTUS, [to Sicinius]  Pray, let's go.

VOLUMNIA  Now, pray, sir, get you gone.
You have done a brave deed. Ere you go, hear this:
As far as doth the Capitol exceed
The meanest house in Rome, so far my son--
This lady's husband here, this, do you see?--
Whom you have banished, does exceed you all.

BRUTUS
Well, well, we'll leave you.

SICINIUS  Why stay we to be baited
With one that wants her wits?	[Tribunes exit.]

VOLUMNIA  Take my prayers with
you.
I would the gods had nothing else to do
But to confirm my curses. Could I meet 'em
But once a day, it would unclog my heart
Of what lies heavy to 't.

MENENIUS  You have told them home,
And, by my troth, you have cause. You'll sup with
me?

VOLUMNIA
Anger's my meat. I sup upon myself
And so shall starve with feeding.
[(To Virgilia.)] Come, let's go.
Leave this faint puling, and lament as I do,
In anger, Juno-like. Come, come, come.	[They exit.]

MENENIUS  Fie, fie, fie!
[He exits.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter a Roman (Nicanor) and a Volsce (Adrian).]


ROMAN  I know you well, sir, and you know me. Your
name I think is Adrian.

VOLSCE  It is so, sir. Truly, I have forgot you.

ROMAN  I am a Roman, and my services are, as you are,
against 'em. Know you me yet?

VOLSCE  Nicanor, no?

ROMAN  The same, sir.

VOLSCE  You had more beard when I last saw you, but
your favor is well approved by your tongue.
What's the news in Rome? I have a note from the
Volscian state to find you out there. You have well
saved me a day's journey.

ROMAN  There hath been in Rome strange insurrections,
the people against the senators, patricians,
and nobles.

VOLSCE  Hath been? Is it ended, then? Our state thinks
not so. They are in a most warlike preparation and
hope to come upon them in the heat of their
division.

ROMAN  The main blaze of it is past, but a small thing
would make it flame again; for the nobles receive
so to heart the banishment of that worthy Coriolanus
that they are in a ripe aptness to take all power
from the people and to pluck from them their tribunes
forever. This lies glowing, I can tell you, and
is almost mature for the violent breaking out.

VOLSCE  Coriolanus banished?

ROMAN  Banished, sir.

VOLSCE  You will be welcome with this intelligence,
Nicanor.

ROMAN  The day serves well for them now. I have heard
it said the fittest time to corrupt a man's wife is
when she's fall'n out with her husband. Your noble
Tullus Aufidius will appear well in these wars, his
great opposer Coriolanus being now in no request
of his country.

VOLSCE  He cannot choose. I am most fortunate thus
accidentally to encounter you. You have ended my
business, and I will merrily accompany you home.

ROMAN  I shall between this and supper tell you most
strange things from Rome, all tending to the good
of their adversaries. Have you an army ready, say
you?

VOLSCE  A most royal one. The centurions and their
charges, distinctly billeted, already in th' entertainment,
and to be on foot at an hour's warning.

ROMAN  I am joyful to hear of their readiness and am
the man, I think, that shall set them in present action.
So, sir, heartily well met, and most glad of
your company.

VOLSCE  You take my part from me, sir. I have the most
cause to be glad of yours.

ROMAN  Well, let us go together.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Coriolanus in mean apparel, disguised,
and muffled.]


CORIOLANUS
A goodly city is this Antium. City,
'Tis I that made thy widows. Many an heir
Of these fair edifices 'fore my wars
Have I heard groan and drop. Then, know me not,
Lest that thy wives with spits and boys with stones
In puny battle slay me.

[Enter a Citizen.]

Save you, sir.

CITIZEN
And you.

CORIOLANUS  Direct me, if it be your will,
Where great Aufidius lies. Is he in Antium?

CITIZEN
He is, and feasts the nobles of the state
At his house this night.

CORIOLANUS  Which is his house, beseech
you?

CITIZEN
This here before you.

CORIOLANUS  Thank you, sir. Farewell.
[Citizen exits.]
O world, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn,
Whose double bosoms seems to wear one heart,
Whose hours, whose bed, whose meal and exercise
Are still together, who twin, as 'twere, in love
Unseparable, shall within this hour,
On a dissension of a doit, break out
To bitterest enmity; so fellest foes,
Whose passions and whose plots have broke their
sleep
To take the one the other, by some chance,
Some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends
And interjoin their issues. So with me:
My birthplace hate I, and my love's upon
This enemy town. I'll enter. If he slay me,
He does fair justice; if he give me way,
I'll do his country service.
[He exits.]

Scene 5
=======
[Music plays. Enter a Servingman.]


FIRST SERVINGMAN  Wine, wine, wine! What service is
here? I think our fellows are asleep.	[He exits.]

[Enter another Servingman.]


SECOND SERVINGMAN  Where's Cotus? My master calls
for him. Cotus!	[He exits.]

[Enter Coriolanus.]


CORIOLANUS
A goodly house. The feast smells well, but I
Appear not like a guest.

[Enter the First Servingman.]


FIRST SERVINGMAN  What would you have, friend?
Whence are you? Here's no place for you. Pray, go
to the door.	[He exits.]

CORIOLANUS
I have deserved no better entertainment
In being Coriolanus.

[Enter Second Servingman.]


SECOND SERVINGMAN  Whence are you, sir?--Has the
porter his eyes in his head, that he gives entrance
to such companions?--Pray, get you out.

CORIOLANUS  Away!

SECOND SERVINGMAN  Away? Get you away.

CORIOLANUS  Now th' art troublesome.

SECOND SERVINGMAN  Are you so brave? I'll have you
talked with anon.

[Enter Third Servingman; the First, entering,
meets him.]


THIRD SERVINGMAN  What fellow's this?

FIRST SERVINGMAN  A strange one as ever I looked on. I
cannot get him out o' th' house. Prithee, call my
master to him.	[He steps aside.]

THIRD SERVINGMAN  What have you to do here, fellow?
Pray you, avoid the house.

CORIOLANUS  Let me but stand. I will not hurt your
hearth.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  What are you?

CORIOLANUS  A gentleman.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  A marv'llous poor one.

CORIOLANUS  True, so I am.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  Pray you, poor gentleman, take up
some other station. Here's no place for you. Pray
you, avoid. Come.

CORIOLANUS  Follow your function, go, and batten on
cold bits.	[Pushes him away from him.]

THIRD SERVINGMAN  What, you will not?--Prithee, tell
my master what a strange guest he has here.

SECOND SERVINGMAN  And I shall.
[Second Servingman exits.]

THIRD SERVINGMAN  Where dwell'st thou?

CORIOLANUS  Under the canopy.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  Under the canopy?

CORIOLANUS  Ay.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  Where's that?

CORIOLANUS  I' th' city of kites and crows.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  I' th' city of kites and crows? What
an ass it is! Then thou dwell'st with daws too?

CORIOLANUS  No, I serve not thy master.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  How, sir? Do you meddle with my
master?

CORIOLANUS  Ay, 'tis an honester service than to meddle
with thy mistress. Thou prat'st and prat'st. Serve
with thy trencher. Hence!	[Beats him away.]
[Third Servingman exits.]

[Enter Aufidius with the Second Servingman.]


AUFIDIUS  Where is this fellow?

SECOND SERVINGMAN  Here, sir. I'd have beaten him like
a dog, but for disturbing the lords within.
[He steps aside.]

AUFIDIUS  Whence com'st thou? What wouldst thou?
Thy name? Why speak'st not? Speak, man. What's
thy name?

CORIOLANUS, [removing his muffler]  If, Tullus,
Not yet thou know'st me, and seeing me, dost not
Think me for the man I am, necessity
Commands me name myself.

AUFIDIUS  What is thy name?

CORIOLANUS
A name unmusical to the Volscians' ears
And harsh in sound to thine.

AUFIDIUS  Say, what's thy name?
Thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face
Bears a command in 't. Though thy tackle's torn,
Thou show'st a noble vessel. What's thy name?

CORIOLANUS
Prepare thy brow to frown. Know'st thou me yet?

AUFIDIUS  I know thee not. Thy name?

CORIOLANUS
My name is Caius Martius, who hath done
To thee particularly and to all the Volsces
Great hurt and mischief; thereto witness may
My surname Coriolanus. The painful service,
The extreme dangers, and the drops of blood
Shed for my thankless country are requited
But with that surname, a good memory
And witness of the malice and displeasure
Which thou shouldst bear me. Only that name
remains.
The cruelty and envy of the people,
Permitted by our dastard nobles, who
Have all forsook me, hath devoured the rest,
And suffered me by th' voice of slaves to be
Whooped out of Rome. Now this extremity
Hath brought me to thy hearth, not out of hope--
Mistake me not--to save my life; for if
I had feared death, of all the men i' th' world
I would have 'voided thee, but in mere spite,
To be full quit of those my banishers,
Stand I before thee here. Then if thou hast
A heart of wreak in thee, that wilt revenge
Thine own particular wrongs and stop those maims
Of shame seen through thy country, speed thee
straight
And make my misery serve thy turn. So use it
That my revengeful services may prove
As benefits to thee, for I will fight
Against my cankered country with the spleen
Of all the under fiends. But if so be
Thou dar'st not this, and that to prove more fortunes
Thou 'rt tired, then, in a word, I also am
Longer to live most weary, and present
My throat to thee and to thy ancient malice,
Which not to cut would show thee but a fool,
Since I have ever followed thee with hate,
Drawn tuns of blood out of thy country's breast,
And cannot live but to thy shame, unless
It be to do thee service.

AUFIDIUS  O Martius, Martius,
Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my
heart
A root of ancient envy. If Jupiter
Should from yond cloud speak divine things
And say 'tis true, I'd not believe them more
Than thee, all-noble Martius. Let me twine
Mine arms about that body, whereagainst
My grained ash an hundred times hath broke
And scarred the moon with splinters.
[They embrace.]
Here I clip
The anvil of my sword and do contest
As hotly and as nobly with thy love
As ever in ambitious strength I did
Contend against thy valor. Know thou first,
I loved the maid I married; never man
Sighed truer breath. But that I see thee here,
Thou noble thing, more dances my rapt heart
Than when I first my wedded mistress saw
Bestride my threshold. Why, thou Mars, I tell thee
We have a power on foot, and I had purpose
Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn
Or lose mine arm for 't. Thou hast beat me out
Twelve several times, and I have nightly since
Dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyself and me;
We have been down together in my sleep,
Unbuckling helms, fisting each other's throat,
And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Martius,
Had we no other quarrel else to Rome but that
Thou art thence banished, we would muster all
From twelve to seventy and, pouring war
Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
Like a bold flood o'erbear 't. O, come, go in,
And take our friendly senators by th' hands,
Who now are here, taking their leaves of me,
Who am prepared against your territories,
Though not for Rome itself.

CORIOLANUS  You bless me, gods!

AUFIDIUS
Therefore, most absolute sir, if thou wilt have
The leading of thine own revenges, take
Th' one half of my commission and set down--
As best thou art experienced, since thou know'st
Thy country's strength and weakness--thine own
ways,
Whether to knock against the gates of Rome,
Or rudely visit them in parts remote
To fright them ere destroy. But come in.
Let me commend thee first to those that shall
Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes!
And more a friend than ere an enemy--
Yet, Martius, that was much. Your hand. Most
welcome!	[Coriolanus and Aufidius exit.]

[Two of the Servingmen come forward.]



FIRST SERVINGMAN  Here's a strange alteration!

SECOND SERVINGMAN  By my hand, I had thought to
have strucken him with a cudgel, and yet my mind
gave me his clothes made a false report of him.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  What an arm he has! He turned me
about with his finger and his thumb as one would
set up a top.

SECOND SERVINGMAN  Nay, I knew by his face that there
was something in him. He had, sir, a kind of face,
methought--I cannot tell how to term it.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  He had so, looking as it were--
Would I were hanged but I thought there was
more in him than I could think.

SECOND SERVINGMAN  So did I, I'll be sworn. He is simply
the rarest man i' th' world.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  I think he is. But a greater soldier
than he you wot one.

SECOND SERVINGMAN  Who, my master?

FIRST SERVINGMAN  Nay, it's no matter for that.

SECOND SERVINGMAN  Worth six on him.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  Nay, not so neither. But I take him
to be the greater soldier.

SECOND SERVINGMAN  Faith, look you, one cannot tell
how to say that. For the defense of a town our general
is excellent.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  Ay, and for an assault too.

[Enter the Third Servingman.]


THIRD SERVINGMAN  O slaves, I can tell you news, news,
you rascals!

BOTH  What, what, what? Let's partake!

THIRD SERVINGMAN  I would not be a Roman, of all nations;
I had as lief be a condemned man.

BOTH  Wherefore? Wherefore?

THIRD SERVINGMAN  Why, here's he that was wont to
thwack our general, Caius Martius.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  Why do you say "thwack our
general"?

THIRD SERVINGMAN  I do not say "thwack our general,"
but he was always good enough for him.

SECOND SERVINGMAN  Come, we are fellows and friends.
He was ever too hard for him; I have heard him
say so himself.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  He was too hard for him directly, to
say the truth on 't, before Corioles; he scotched
him and notched him like a carbonado.

SECOND SERVINGMAN  An he had been cannibally given,
he might have boiled and eaten him too.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  But, more of thy news.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  Why, he is so made on here within
as if he were son and heir to Mars; set at upper end
o' th' table; no question asked him by any of the
senators but they stand bald before him. Our general
himself makes a mistress of him, sanctifies
himself with 's hand, and turns up the white o' th'
eye to his discourse. But the bottom of the news is,
our general is cut i' th' middle and but one half of
what he was yesterday, for the other has half, by
the entreaty and grant of the whole table. He'll go,
he says, and sowl the porter of Rome gates by th'
ears. He will mow all down before him and leave
his passage polled.

SECOND SERVINGMAN  And he's as like to do 't as any
man I can imagine.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  Do 't? He will do 't! For, look you,
sir, he has as many friends as enemies, which
friends, sir, as it were, durst not, look you, sir, show
themselves, as we term it, his friends whilest he's
in directitude.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  Directitude? What's that?

THIRD SERVINGMAN  But when they shall see, sir, his
crest up again, and the man in blood, they will out
of their burrows like coneys after rain, and revel
all with him.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  But when goes this forward?

THIRD SERVINGMAN  Tomorrow, today, presently. You
shall have the drum struck up this afternoon. 'Tis,
as it were, a parcel of their feast, and to be executed
ere they wipe their lips.

SECOND SERVINGMAN  Why then, we shall have a stirring
world again. This peace is nothing but to rust iron,
increase tailors, and breed ballad-makers.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  Let me have war, say I. It exceeds
peace as far as day does night. It's sprightly walking,
audible, and full of vent. Peace is a very apoplexy,
lethargy; mulled, deaf, sleepy, insensible; a getter
of more bastard children than war's a destroyer of
men.

SECOND SERVINGMAN  'Tis so, and as wars in some sort
may be said to be a ravisher, so it cannot be denied
but peace is a great maker of cuckolds.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  Ay, and it makes men hate one
another.

THIRD SERVINGMAN  Reason: because they then less
need one another. The wars for my money! I hope
to see Romans as cheap as Volscians. [(Noise
within.)] They are rising; they are rising.

FIRST AND SECOND SERVINGMEN  In, in, in, in!
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter the two Tribunes. Sicinius and Brutus.]


SICINIUS
We hear not of him, neither need we fear him.
His remedies are tame--the present peace,
And quietness of the people, which before
Were in wild hurry. Here do we make his friends
Blush that the world goes well, who rather had,
Though they themselves did suffer by 't, behold
Dissentious numbers pest'ring streets than see
Our tradesmen singing in their shops and going
About their functions friendly.

BRUTUS
We stood to 't in good time.

[Enter Menenius.]

Is this Menenius?

SICINIUS
'Tis he, 'tis he. O, he is grown most kind
Of late.--Hail, sir.

MENENIUS  Hail to you both.

SICINIUS
Your Coriolanus is not much missed
But with his friends. The commonwealth doth stand,
And so would do were he more angry at it.

MENENIUS
All's well, and might have been much better if
He could have temporized.

SICINIUS  Where is he, hear you?

MENENIUS  Nay, I hear nothing;
His mother and his wife hear nothing from him.

[Enter three or four Citizens.]


ALL CITIZENS, [to the Tribunes]
The gods preserve
you both!

SICINIUS  Good e'en, our neighbors.

BRUTUS
Good e'en to you all, good e'en to you all.

FIRST CITIZEN
Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees
Are bound to pray for you both.

SICINIUS  Live, and thrive!

BRUTUS
Farewell, kind neighbors. We wished Coriolanus
Had loved you as we did.

ALL CITIZENS  Now the gods keep you!

BOTH TRIBUNES  Farewell, farewell.	[Citizens exit.]

SICINIUS
This is a happier and more comely time
Than when these fellows ran about the streets
Crying confusion.

BRUTUS  Caius Martius was
A worthy officer i' th' war, but insolent,
O'ercome with pride, ambitious, past all thinking
Self-loving.

SICINIUS
And affecting one sole throne, without assistance.

MENENIUS  I think not so.

SICINIUS
We should by this, to all our lamentation,
If he had gone forth consul, found it so.

BRUTUS
The gods have well prevented it, and Rome
Sits safe and still without him.

[Enter an Aedile.]


AEDILE  Worthy tribunes,
There is a slave, whom we have put in prison,
Reports the Volsces with two several powers
Are entered in the Roman territories,
And with the deepest malice of the war
Destroy what lies before 'em.

MENENIUS  'Tis Aufidius,
Who, hearing of our Martius' banishment,
Thrusts forth his horns again into the world,
Which were inshelled when Martius stood for Rome,
And durst not once peep out.

SICINIUS  Come, what talk you of Martius?

BRUTUS
Go see this rumorer whipped. It cannot be
The Volsces dare break with us.

MENENIUS  Cannot be?
We have record that very well it can,
And three examples of the like hath been
Within my age. But reason with the fellow
Before you punish him, where he heard this,
Lest you shall chance to whip your information
And beat the messenger who bids beware
Of what is to be dreaded.

SICINIUS  Tell not me.
I know this cannot be.

BRUTUS  Not possible.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER
The nobles in great earnestness are going
All to the Senate House. Some news is coming
That turns their countenances.

SICINIUS  'Tis this slave--
Go whip him 'fore the people's eyes--his raising,
Nothing but his report.

MESSENGER  Yes, worthy sir,
The slave's report is seconded, and more,
More fearful, is delivered.

SICINIUS  What more fearful?

MESSENGER
It is spoke freely out of many mouths--
How probable I do not know--that Martius,
Joined with Aufidius, leads a power 'gainst Rome
And vows revenge as spacious as between
The young'st and oldest thing.

SICINIUS  This is most likely!

BRUTUS
Raised only that the weaker sort may wish
Good Martius home again.

SICINIUS  The very trick on 't.

MENENIUS  This is unlikely;
He and Aufidius can no more atone
Than violent'st contrariety.

[Enter a Second Messenger.]


SECOND MESSENGER  You are sent for to the Senate.
A fearful army, led by Caius Martius
Associated with Aufidius, rages
Upon our territories, and have already
O'erborne their way, consumed with fire and took
What lay before them.

[Enter Cominius.]


COMINIUS, [to the Tribunes]  O, you have made good
work!

MENENIUS  What news? What news?

COMINIUS, [to the Tribunes]
You have holp to ravish your own daughters and
To melt the city leads upon your pates,
To see your wives dishonored to your noses--

MENENIUS  What's the news? What's the news?

COMINIUS, [to the Tribunes]
Your temples burned in their cement, and
Your franchises, whereon you stood, confined
Into an auger's bore.

MENENIUS  Pray now, your news?--
You have made fair work, I fear me.--Pray, your
news?
If Martius should be joined with Volscians--

COMINIUS  If?
He is their god; he leads them like a thing
Made by some other deity than Nature,
That shapes man better; and they follow him
Against us brats with no less confidence
Than boys pursuing summer butterflies
Or butchers killing flies.

MENENIUS, [to the Tribunes]  You have made good work,
You and your apron-men, you that stood so much
Upon the voice of occupation and
The breath of garlic eaters!

COMINIUS
He'll shake your Rome about your ears.

MENENIUS
As Hercules did shake down mellow fruit.
You have made fair work.

BRUTUS  But is this true, sir?

COMINIUS  Ay, and you'll look pale
Before you find it other. All the regions
Do smilingly revolt, and who resists
Are mocked for valiant ignorance
And perish constant fools. Who is 't can blame him?
Your enemies and his find something in him.

MENENIUS  We are all undone, unless
The noble man have mercy.

COMINIUS  Who shall ask it?
The Tribunes cannot do 't for shame; the people
Deserve such pity of him as the wolf
Does of the shepherds. For his best friends, if they
Should say "Be good to Rome," they charged him
even
As those should do that had deserved his hate
And therein showed like enemies.

MENENIUS  'Tis true.
If he were putting to my house the brand
That should consume it, I have not the face
To say "Beseech you, cease."--You have made fair
hands,
You and your crafts! You have crafted fair!

COMINIUS  You have
brought
A trembling upon Rome such as was never
S' incapable of help.

TRIBUNES  Say not we brought it.

MENENIUS
How? Was 't we? We loved him, but like beasts
And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters,
Who did hoot him out o' th' city.

COMINIUS  But I fear
They'll roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius,
The second name of men, obeys his points
As if he were his officer. Desperation
Is all the policy, strength, and defense
That Rome can make against them.

[Enter a troop of Citizens.]


MENENIUS  Here come the
clusters.--
And is Aufidius with him? You are they
That made the air unwholesome when you cast
Your stinking, greasy caps in hooting at
Coriolanus' exile. Now he's coming,
And not a hair upon a soldier's head
Which will not prove a whip. As many coxcombs
As you threw caps up will he tumble down
And pay you for your voices. 'Tis no matter.
If he could burn us all into one coal,
We have deserved it.

ALL CITIZENS  Faith, we hear fearful news.

FIRST CITIZEN  For mine own part,
When I said banish him, I said 'twas pity.

SECOND CITIZEN  And so did I.

THIRD CITIZEN  And so did I. And, to say the truth, so
did very many of us. That we did we did for the
best; and though we willingly consented to his
banishment, yet it was against our will.

COMINIUS  You're goodly things, you voices!

MENENIUS
You have made good work, you and your cry!--
Shall 's to the Capitol?

COMINIUS  O, ay, what else?	[Both exit.]

SICINIUS
Go, masters, get you home. Be not dismayed.
These are a side that would be glad to have
This true which they so seem to fear. Go home,
And show no sign of fear.

FIRST CITIZEN  The gods be good to us! Come, masters,
let's home. I ever said we were i' th' wrong when
we banished him.

SECOND CITIZEN  So did we all. But, come, let's home.
[Citizens exit.]

BRUTUS  I do not like this news.

SICINIUS  Nor I.

BRUTUS
Let's to the Capitol. Would half my wealth
Would buy this for a lie.

SICINIUS  Pray, let's go.
[Tribunes exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter Aufidius with his Lieutenant.]


AUFIDIUS  Do they still fly to th' Roman?

LIEUTENANT
I do not know what witchcraft's in him, but
Your soldiers use him as the grace 'fore meat,
Their talk at table, and their thanks at end;
And you are dark'ned in this action, sir,
Even by your own.

AUFIDIUS  I cannot help it now,
Unless by using means I lame the foot
Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier,
Even to my person, than I thought he would
When first I did embrace him. Yet his nature
In that's no changeling, and I must excuse
What cannot be amended.

LIEUTENANT  Yet I wish, sir--
I mean for your particular--you had not
Joined in commission with him, but either
Have borne the action of yourself or else
To him had left it solely.

AUFIDIUS
I understand thee well, and be thou sure,
When he shall come to his account, he knows not
What I can urge against him, although it seems,
And so he thinks and is no less apparent
To th' vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly,
And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state,
Fights dragonlike, and does achieve as soon
As draw his sword; yet he hath left undone
That which shall break his neck or hazard mine
Whene'er we come to our account.

LIEUTENANT
Sir, I beseech you, think you he'll carry Rome?

AUFIDIUS
All places yields to him ere he sits down,
And the nobility of Rome are his;
The Senators and Patricians love him too.
The Tribunes are no soldiers, and their people
Will be as rash in the repeal as hasty
To expel him thence. I think he'll be to Rome
As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it
By sovereignty of nature. First, he was
A noble servant to them, but he could not
Carry his honors even. Whether 'twas pride,
Which out of daily fortune ever taints
The happy man; whether defect of judgment,
To fail in the disposing of those chances
Which he was lord of; or whether nature,
Not to be other than one thing, not moving
From th' casque to th' cushion, but commanding
peace
Even with the same austerity and garb
As he controlled the war; but one of these--
As he hath spices of them all--not all,
For I dare so far free him--made him feared,
So hated, and so banished. But he has a merit
To choke it in the utt'rance. So our virtues
Lie in th' interpretation of the time,
And power, unto itself most commendable,
Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair
T' extol what it hath done.
One fire drives out one fire, one nail one nail;
Rights by rights falter; strengths by strengths do
fail.
Come, let's away. When, Caius, Rome is thine,
Thou art poor'st of all; then shortly art thou mine.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Menenius, Cominius, Sicinius, Brutus (the two
Tribunes), with others.]


MENENIUS
No, I'll not go. You hear what he hath said
Which was sometime his general, who loved him
In a most dear particular. He called me father,
But what o' that? Go you that banished him;
A mile before his tent, fall down, and knee
The way into his mercy. Nay, if he coyed
To hear Cominius speak, I'll keep at home.

COMINIUS
He would not seem to know me.

MENENIUS  Do you hear?

COMINIUS
Yet one time he did call me by my name.
I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops
That we have bled together. "Coriolanus"
He would not answer to, forbade all names.
He was a kind of nothing, titleless,
Till he had forged himself a name o' th' fire
Of burning Rome.

MENENIUS, [to the Tribunes]
Why, so; you have made good work!
A pair of tribunes that have wracked Rome
To make coals cheap! A noble memory!

COMINIUS
I minded him how royal 'twas to pardon
When it was less expected. He replied
It was a bare petition of a state
To one whom they had punished.

MENENIUS  Very well.
Could he say less?

COMINIUS
I offered to awaken his regard
For 's private friends. His answer to me was
He could not stay to pick them in a pile
Of noisome musty chaff. He said 'twas folly
For one poor grain or two to leave unburnt
And still to nose th' offense.

MENENIUS  For one poor grain or two!
I am one of those! His mother, wife, his child,
And this brave fellow too, we are the grains;
You are the musty chaff, and you are smelt
Above the moon. We must be burnt for you.

SICINIUS
Nay, pray, be patient. If you refuse your aid
In this so-never-needed help, yet do not
Upbraid 's with our distress. But sure, if you
Would be your country's pleader, your good tongue,
More than the instant army we can make,
Might stop our countryman.

MENENIUS  No, I'll not meddle.

SICINIUS  Pray you, go to him.

MENENIUS  What should I do?

BRUTUS
Only make trial what your love can do
For Rome, towards Martius.

MENENIUS  Well, and say that
Martius
Return me, as Cominius is returned, unheard,
What then? But as a discontented friend,
Grief-shot with his unkindness? Say 't be so?

SICINIUS  Yet your good will
Must have that thanks from Rome after the measure
As you intended well.

MENENIUS  I'll undertake 't.
I think he'll hear me. Yet to bite his lip
And hum at good Cominius much unhearts me.
He was not taken well; he had not dined.
The veins unfilled, our blood is cold, and then
We pout upon the morning, are unapt
To give or to forgive; but when we have stuffed
These pipes and these conveyances of our blood
With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls
Than in our priestlike fasts. Therefore I'll watch him
Till he be dieted to my request,
And then I'll set upon him.

BRUTUS
You know the very road into his kindness
And cannot lose your way.

MENENIUS  Good faith, I'll prove him,
Speed how it will. I shall ere long have knowledge
Of my success.	[He exits.]

COMINIUS  He'll never hear him.

SICINIUS  Not?

COMINIUS
I tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye
Red as 'twould burn Rome; and his injury
The jailor to his pity. I kneeled before him;
'Twas very faintly he said "Rise"; dismissed me
Thus with his speechless hand. What he would do
He sent in writing after me; what he
Would not, bound with an oath to yield to his
Conditions. So that all hope is vain
Unless his noble mother and his wife,
Who, as I hear, mean to solicit him
For mercy to his country. Therefore let's hence
And with our fair entreaties haste them on.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Menenius to the Watch, or Guard.]


FIRST WATCH  Stay! Whence are you?

SECOND WATCH  Stand, and go back.

MENENIUS
You guard like men; 'tis well. But by your leave,
I am an officer of state and come
To speak with Coriolanus.

FIRST WATCH  From whence?

MENENIUS  From Rome.

FIRST WATCH
You may not pass; you must return. Our general
Will no more hear from thence.

SECOND WATCH
You'll see your Rome embraced with fire before
You'll speak with Coriolanus.

MENENIUS  Good my friends,
If you have heard your general talk of Rome
And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks
My name hath touched your ears. It is Menenius.

FIRST WATCH
Be it so; go back. The virtue of your name
Is not here passable.

MENENIUS  I tell thee, fellow,
Thy general is my lover. I have been
The book of his good acts, whence men have read
His fame unparalleled happily amplified;
For I have ever verified my friends--
Of whom he's chief--with all the size that verity
Would without lapsing suffer. Nay, sometimes,
Like to a bowl upon a subtle ground,
I have tumbled past the throw, and in his praise
Have almost stamped the leasing. Therefore, fellow,
I must have leave to pass.

FIRST WATCH  Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in
his behalf as you have uttered words in your own,
you should not pass here, no, though it were as virtuous
to lie as to live chastely. Therefore, go back.

MENENIUS  Prithee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius,
always factionary on the party of your
general.

SECOND WATCH  Howsoever you have been his liar, as
you say you have, I am one that, telling true under
him, must say you cannot pass. Therefore, go back.

MENENIUS  Has he dined, can'st thou tell? For I would
not speak with him till after dinner.

FIRST WATCH  You are a Roman, are you?

MENENIUS  I am, as thy general is.

FIRST WATCH  Then you should hate Rome as he does.
Can you, when you have pushed out your gates the
very defender of them, and, in a violent popular
ignorance given your enemy your shield, think to
front his revenges with the easy groans of old
women, the virginal palms of your daughters, or
with the palsied intercession of such a decayed
dotant as you seem to be? Can you think to blow
out the intended fire your city is ready to flame in
with such weak breath as this? No, you are deceived.
Therefore, back to Rome and prepare for
your execution. You are condemned. Our general
has sworn you out of reprieve and pardon.

MENENIUS  Sirrah, if thy captain knew I were here, he
would use me with estimation.

FIRST WATCH  Come, my captain knows you not.

MENENIUS  I mean thy general.

FIRST WATCH  My general cares not for you. Back, I say,
go, lest I let forth your half pint of blood. Back!
That's the utmost of your having. Back!

MENENIUS  Nay, but fellow, fellow--

[Enter Coriolanus with Aufidius.]


CORIOLANUS  What's the matter?

MENENIUS [to First Watch]  Now, you companion, I'll
say an errand for you. You shall know now that I
am in estimation; you shall perceive that a Jack
guardant cannot office me from my son Coriolanus.
Guess but by my entertainment with him
if thou stand'st not i' th' state of hanging or of some
death more long in spectatorship and crueler in
suffering; behold now presently, and swoon for
what's to come upon thee. [(To Coriolanus.)] The
glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy particular
prosperity and love thee no worse than thy old
father Menenius does! O my son, my son! [(He
weeps.)] Thou art preparing fire for us; look thee,
here's water to quench it. I was hardly moved to
come to thee; but being assured none but myself
could move thee, I have been blown out of your
gates with sighs, and conjure thee to pardon Rome
and thy petitionary countrymen. The good gods
assuage thy wrath and turn the dregs of it upon
this varlet here, this, who, like a block, hath denied
my access to thee.

CORIOLANUS  Away!

MENENIUS  How? Away?

CORIOLANUS
Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs
Are servanted to others. Though I owe
My revenge properly, my remission lies
In Volscian breasts. That we have been familiar,
Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison rather
Than pity note how much. Therefore, begone.
Mine ears against your suits are stronger than
Your gates against my force. Yet, for I loved thee,
Take this along; I writ it for thy sake,
[He gives Menenius a paper.]
And would have sent it. Another word, Menenius,
I will not hear thee speak.--This man, Aufidius,
Was my beloved in Rome; yet thou behold'st.

AUFIDIUS  You keep a constant temper.	[They exit.]
[The Guard and Menenius remain.]

FIRST WATCH  Now, sir, is your name Menenius?

SECOND WATCH  'Tis a spell, you see, of much power. You
know the way home again.

FIRST WATCH  Do you hear how we are shent for keeping
your Greatness back?

SECOND WATCH  What cause do you think I have to
swoon?

MENENIUS  I neither care for th' world nor your general.
For such things as you, I can scarce think
there's any, you're so slight. He that hath a will to
die by himself fears it not from another. Let your
general do his worst. For you, be that you are,
long; and your misery increase with your age! I say
to you, as I was said to, away!	[He exits.]

FIRST WATCH  A noble fellow, I warrant him.

SECOND WATCH  The worthy fellow is our general. He's
the rock, the oak not to be wind-shaken.
[Watch exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Coriolanus and Aufidius.]


CORIOLANUS
We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow
Set down our host. My partner in this action,
You must report to th' Volscian lords how plainly
I have borne this business.

AUFIDIUS  Only their ends
You have respected, stopped your ears against
The general suit of Rome, never admitted
A private whisper, no, not with such friends
That thought them sure of you.

CORIOLANUS  This last old man,
Whom with a cracked heart I have sent to Rome,
Loved me above the measure of a father,
Nay, godded me indeed. Their latest refuge
Was to send him, for whose old love I have--
Though I showed sourly to him--once more offered
The first conditions, which they did refuse
And cannot now accept, to grace him only
That thought he could do more. A very little
I have yielded to. Fresh embassies and suits,
Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter
Will I lend ear to.	[Shout within.]
Ha? What shout is this?
Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow
In the same time 'tis made? I will not.

[Enter Virgilia, Volumnia, Valeria, young Martius,
with Attendants.]

My wife comes foremost, then the honored mold
Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand
The grandchild to her blood. But out, affection!
All bond and privilege of nature, break!
Let it be virtuous to be obstinate.	[Virgilia curtsies.]
What is that curtsy worth? Or those doves' eyes,
Which can make gods forsworn? I melt and am not
Of stronger earth than others.	[Volumnia bows.]
My mother bows,
As if Olympus to a molehill should
In supplication nod; and my young boy
Hath an aspect of intercession which
Great Nature cries "Deny not!" Let the Volsces
Plow Rome and harrow Italy, I'll never
Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand
As if a man were author of himself,
And knew no other kin.

VIRGILIA  My lord and husband.

CORIOLANUS
These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.

VIRGILIA
The sorrow that delivers us thus changed
Makes you think so.

CORIOLANUS  Like a dull actor now,
I have forgot my part, and I am out,
Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh,
Forgive my tyranny, but do not say
For that "Forgive our Romans."	[They kiss.]
O, a kiss
Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge!
Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss
I carried from thee, dear, and my true lip
Hath virgined it e'er since. You gods! I prate
And the most noble mother of the world
Leave unsaluted. Sink, my knee, i' th' earth;	[Kneels.]
Of thy deep duty more impression show
Than that of common sons.

VOLUMNIA  O, stand up blest,
[He rises.]
Whilst with no softer cushion than the flint
I kneel before thee and unproperly
Show duty, as mistaken all this while
Between the child and parent.	[She kneels.]

CORIOLANUS  What's this?
Your knees to me? To your corrected son?
[He raises her up.]
Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach
Fillip the stars! Then let the mutinous winds
Strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun,
Murdering impossibility to make
What cannot be slight work.

VOLUMNIA  Thou art my warrior;
I holp to frame thee. Do you know this lady?

CORIOLANUS
The noble sister of Publicola,
The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle
That's curdied by the frost from purest snow
And hangs on Dian's temple!--Dear Valeria.

VOLUMNIA, [presenting young Martius]
This is a poor epitome of yours,
Which by th' interpretation of full time
May show like all yourself.

CORIOLANUS, [to young Martius]  The god of soldiers,
With the consent of supreme Jove, inform
Thy thoughts with nobleness, that thou mayst prove
To shame unvulnerable, and stick i' th' wars
Like a great seamark standing every flaw
And saving those that eye thee.

VOLUMNIA, [to young Martius]  Your knee, sirrah.
[He kneels.]

CORIOLANUS  That's my brave boy!

VOLUMNIA
Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself
Are suitors to you.	[Young Martius rises.]

CORIOLANUS  I beseech you, peace;
Or if you'd ask, remember this before:
The thing I have forsworn to grant may never
Be held by you denials. Do not bid me
Dismiss my soldiers or capitulate
Again with Rome's mechanics. Tell me not
Wherein I seem unnatural; desire not
T' allay my rages and revenges with
Your colder reasons.

VOLUMNIA  O, no more, no more!
You have said you will not grant us anything;
For we have nothing else to ask but that
Which you deny already. Yet we will ask,
That if you fail in our request, the blame
May hang upon your hardness. Therefore hear us.

CORIOLANUS
Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark, for we'll
Hear naught from Rome in private. [He sits.] Your
request?

VOLUMNIA
Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment
And state of bodies would bewray what life
We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself
How more unfortunate than all living women
Are we come hither; since that thy sight, which
should
Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with
comforts,
Constrains them weep and shake with fear and
sorrow,
Making the mother, wife, and child to see
The son, the husband, and the father tearing
His country's bowels out. And to poor we
Thine enmity's most capital. Thou barr'st us
Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort
That all but we enjoy. For how can we--
Alas, how can we--for our country pray,
Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory,
Whereto we are bound? Alack, or we must lose
The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person,
Our comfort in the country. We must find
An evident calamity, though we had
Our wish, which side should win, for either thou
Must as a foreign recreant be led
With manacles through our streets, or else
Triumphantly tread on thy country's ruin
And bear the palm for having bravely shed
Thy wife and children's blood. For myself, son,
I purpose not to wait on fortune till
These wars determine. If I cannot persuade thee
Rather to show a noble grace to both parts
Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner
March to assault thy country than to tread--
Trust to 't, thou shalt not--on thy mother's womb
That brought thee to this world.

VIRGILIA  Ay, and mine,
That brought you forth this boy to keep your name
Living to time.

YOUNG MARTIUS  He shall not tread on me.
I'll run away till I am bigger, but then I'll fight.

CORIOLANUS
Not of a woman's tenderness to be
Requires nor child nor woman's face to see.--
I have sat too long.	[He rises.]

VOLUMNIA  Nay, go not from us thus.
If it were so, that our request did tend
To save the Romans, thereby to destroy
The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn
us
As poisonous of your honor. No, our suit
Is that you reconcile them, while the Volsces
May say "This mercy we have showed," the Romans
"This we received," and each in either side
Give the all-hail to thee and cry "Be blest
For making up this peace!" Thou know'st, great son,
The end of war's uncertain, but this certain,
That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit
Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name
Whose repetition will be dogged with curses,
Whose chronicle thus writ: "The man was noble,
But with his last attempt he wiped it out,
Destroyed his country, and his name remains
To th' ensuing age abhorred." Speak to me, son.
Thou hast affected the fine strains of honor
To imitate the graces of the gods,
To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' th' air
And yet to charge thy sulfur with a bolt
That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak?
Think'st thou it honorable for a noble man
Still to remember wrongs?--Daughter, speak you.
He cares not for your weeping.--Speak thou, boy.
Perhaps thy childishness will move him more
Than can our reasons.--There's no man in the world
More bound to 's mother, yet here he lets me prate
Like one i' th' stocks. Thou hast never in thy life
Showed thy dear mother any courtesy
When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood,
Has clucked thee to the wars and safely home,
Loaden with honor. Say my request's unjust
And spurn me back; but if it be not so,
Thou art not honest, and the gods will plague thee
That thou restrain'st from me the duty which
To a mother's part belongs.--He turns away.--
Down, ladies! Let us shame him with our knees.
To his surname Coriolanus 'longs more pride
Than pity to our prayers. Down! An end.
[They kneel.]
This is the last. So, we will home to Rome
And die among our neighbors.--Nay, behold 's.
This boy that cannot tell what he would have,
But kneels and holds up hands for fellowship,
Does reason our petition with more strength
Than thou hast to deny 't.--Come, let us go.
[They rise.]
This fellow had a Volscian to his mother,
His wife is in Corioles, and his child
Like him by chance.--Yet give us our dispatch.
I am hushed until our city be afire,
And then I'll speak a little.
[He holds her by the hand, silent.]

CORIOLANUS  O mother, mother!
What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope,
The gods look down, and this unnatural scene
They laugh at. O, my mother, mother, O!
You have won a happy victory to Rome,
But, for your son--believe it, O, believe it!--
Most dangerously you have with him prevailed,
If not most mortal to him. But let it come.--
Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars,
I'll frame convenient peace. Now, good Aufidius,
Were you in my stead, would you have heard
A mother less? Or granted less, Aufidius?

AUFIDIUS
I was moved withal.

CORIOLANUS  I dare be sworn you were.
And, sir, it is no little thing to make
Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir,
What peace you'll make advise me. For my part,
I'll not to Rome. I'll back with you; and pray you,
Stand to me in this cause.--O mother!--Wife!
[He speaks with them aside.]

AUFIDIUS, [aside]
I am glad thou hast set thy mercy and thy honor
At difference in thee. Out of that I'll work
Myself a former fortune.

CORIOLANUS, [to the Women]  Ay, by and by;
But we will drink together, and you shall bear
A better witness back than words, which we,
On like conditions, will have countersealed.
Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve
To have a temple built you. All the swords
In Italy, and her confederate arms,
Could not have made this peace.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Menenius and Sicinius.]


MENENIUS  See you yond coign o' th' Capitol, yond
cornerstone?

SICINIUS  Why, what of that?

MENENIUS  If it be possible for you to displace it with
your little finger, there is some hope the ladies of
Rome, especially his mother, may prevail with
him. But I say there is no hope in 't. Our throats
are sentenced and stay upon execution.

SICINIUS  Is 't possible that so short a time can alter the
condition of a man?

MENENIUS  There is differency between a grub and a
butterfly, yet your butterfly was a grub. This Martius
is grown from man to dragon. He has wings;
he's more than a creeping thing.

SICINIUS  He loved his mother dearly.

MENENIUS  So did he me; and he no more remembers
his mother now than an eight-year-old horse. The
tartness of his face sours ripe grapes. When he
walks, he moves like an engine, and the ground
shrinks before his treading. He is able to pierce a
corslet with his eye, talks like a knell, and his hum
is a battery. He sits in his state as a thing made for
Alexander. What he bids be done is finished with
his bidding. He wants nothing of a god but eternity
and a heaven to throne in.

SICINIUS  Yes, mercy, if you report him truly.

MENENIUS  I paint him in the character. Mark what
mercy his mother shall bring from him. There is
no more mercy in him than there is milk in a male
tiger. That shall our poor city find, and all this is
long of you.

SICINIUS  The gods be good unto us.

MENENIUS  No, in such a case the gods will not be good
unto us. When we banished him, we respected not
them; and he returning to break our necks, they
respect not us.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER, [to Sicinius]
Sir, if you'd save your life, fly to your house.
The plebeians have got your fellow tribune
And hale him up and down, all swearing if
The Roman ladies bring not comfort home,
They'll give him death by inches.

[Enter another Messenger.]


SICINIUS  What's the news?

SECOND MESSENGER
Good news, good news! The ladies have prevailed.
The Volscians are dislodged and Martius gone.
A merrier day did never yet greet Rome,
No, not th' expulsion of the Tarquins.

SICINIUS  Friend,
Art thou certain this is true? Is 't most certain?

SECOND MESSENGER
As certain as I know the sun is fire.
Where have you lurked that you make doubt of it?
Ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tide
As the recomforted through th' gates. Why, hark you!

[Trumpets, hautboys, drums beat, all together.]


The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries, and fifes,
Tabors and cymbals, and the shouting Romans
Make the sun dance. Hark you!	[A shout within.]

MENENIUS  This is good news.
I will go meet the ladies. This Volumnia
Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians
A city full; of tribunes such as you
A sea and land full. You have prayed well today.
This morning for ten thousand of your throats
I'd not have given a doit. Hark, how they joy!
[Sound still with the shouts.]

SICINIUS, [to Second Messenger]  First, the gods bless
you for your tidings; next, accept my thankfulness.

SECOND MESSENGER
Sir, we have all great cause to give great thanks.

SICINIUS  They are near the city?

SECOND MESSENGER  Almost at point to enter.

SICINIUS  We'll meet them, and help the joy.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter two Senators, with Ladies (Volumnia, Virgilia,
Valeria) passing over the stage, with other Lords.]


SENATOR
Behold our patroness, the life of Rome!
Call all your tribes together, praise the gods,
And make triumphant fires. Strew flowers before
them,
Unshout the noise that banished Martius,
Repeal him with the welcome of his mother.
Cry "Welcome, ladies, welcome!"

ALL  Welcome, ladies, welcome!
[A flourish with drums and trumpets.]
[They exit.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Tullus Aufidius, with Attendants.]


AUFIDIUS
Go tell the lords o' th' city I am here.
Deliver them this paper.	[(He gives them a paper.)]
Having read it,
Bid them repair to th' marketplace, where I,
Even in theirs and in the commons' ears,
Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse
The city ports by this hath entered and
Intends t' appear before the people, hoping
To purge himself with words. Dispatch.
[The Attendants exit.]

[Enter three or four Conspirators of Aufidius's faction.]

Most welcome!

FIRST CONSPIRATOR
How is it with our general?

AUFIDIUS  Even so
As with a man by his own alms empoisoned
And with his charity slain.

SECOND CONSPIRATOR  Most noble sir,
If you do hold the same intent wherein
You wished us parties, we'll deliver you
Of your great danger.

AUFIDIUS  Sir, I cannot tell.
We must proceed as we do find the people.

THIRD CONSPIRATOR
The people will remain uncertain whilst
'Twixt you there's difference, but the fall of either
Makes the survivor heir of all.

AUFIDIUS  I know it,
And my pretext to strike at him admits
A good construction. I raised him, and I pawned
Mine honor for his truth, who, being so heightened,
He watered his new plants with dews of flattery,
Seducing so my friends; and to this end,
He bowed his nature, never known before
But to be rough, unswayable, and free.

THIRD CONSPIRATOR  Sir, his stoutness
When he did stand for consul, which he lost
By lack of stooping--

AUFIDIUS  That I would have spoke of.
Being banished for 't, he came unto my hearth,
Presented to my knife his throat. I took him,
Made him joint servant with me, gave him way
In all his own desires; nay, let him choose
Out of my files, his projects to accomplish,
My best and freshest men; served his designments
In mine own person; holp to reap the fame
Which he did end all his; and took some pride
To do myself this wrong; till at the last
I seemed his follower, not partner; and
He waged me with his countenance as if
I had been mercenary.

FIRST CONSPIRATOR  So he did, my lord.
The army marvelled at it, and, in the last,
When he had carried Rome and that we looked
For no less spoil than glory--

AUFIDIUS  There was it
For which my sinews shall be stretched upon him.
At a few drops of women's rheum, which are
As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labor
Of our great action. Therefore shall he die,
And I'll renew me in his fall. But hark!

[Drums and trumpets sounds, with great shouts
of the people.]



FIRST CONSPIRATOR
Your native town you entered like a post
And had no welcomes home, but he returns
Splitting the air with noise.

SECOND CONSPIRATOR  And patient fools,
Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear
With giving him glory.

THIRD CONSPIRATOR  Therefore at your vantage,
Ere he express himself or move the people
With what he would say, let him feel your sword,
Which we will second. When he lies along,
After your way his tale pronounced shall bury
His reasons with his body.

AUFIDIUS  Say no more.

[Enter the Lords of the city.]

Here come the lords.

ALL LORDS
You are most welcome home.

AUFIDIUS  I have not deserved it.
But, worthy lords, have you with heed perused
What I have written to you?

ALL LORDS  We have.

FIRST LORD  And grieve to hear 't.
What faults he made before the last, I think
Might have found easy fines, but there to end
Where he was to begin and give away
The benefit of our levies, answering us
With our own charge, making a treaty where
There was a yielding--this admits no excuse.

[Enter Coriolanus marching with Drum and Colors, the
Commoners being with him.]


AUFIDIUS  He approaches. You shall hear him.

CORIOLANUS
Hail, lords! I am returned your soldier,
No more infected with my country's love
Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting
Under your great command. You are to know
That prosperously I have attempted, and
With bloody passage led your wars even to
The gates of Rome. Our spoils we have brought
home
Doth more than counterpoise a full third part
The charges of the action. We have made peace
With no less honor to the Antiates
Than shame to th' Romans, and we here deliver,
Subscribed by' th' Consuls and patricians,
Together with the seal o' th' Senate, what
We have compounded on.
[He offers the lords a paper.]

AUFIDIUS  Read it not, noble lords,
But tell the traitor in the highest degree
He hath abused your powers.

CORIOLANUS  "Traitor"? How now?

AUFIDIUS  Ay, traitor, Martius.

CORIOLANUS  Martius?

AUFIDIUS
Ay, Martius, Caius Martius. Dost thou think
I'll grace thee with that robbery, thy stol'n name
Coriolanus, in Corioles?
You lords and heads o' th' state, perfidiously
He has betrayed your business and given up
For certain drops of salt your city Rome--
I say your city--to his wife and mother,
Breaking his oath and resolution like
A twist of rotten silk, never admitting
Counsel o' th' war, but at his nurse's tears
He whined and roared away your victory,
That pages blushed at him and men of heart
Looked wond'ring each at other.

CORIOLANUS  Hear'st thou, Mars?

AUFIDIUS  Name not the god, thou boy of tears.

CORIOLANUS  Ha?

AUFIDIUS  No more.

CORIOLANUS
Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart
Too great for what contains it. "Boy"? O slave!--
Pardon me, lords, 'tis the first time that ever
I was forced to scold. Your judgments, my grave
lords,
Must give this cur the lie; and his own notion--
Who wears my stripes impressed upon him, that
Must bear my beating to his grave--shall join
To thrust the lie unto him.

FIRST LORD  Peace, both, and hear me speak.

CORIOLANUS
Cut me to pieces, Volsces. Men and lads,
Stain all your edges on me. "Boy"? False hound!
If you have writ your annals true, 'tis there
That like an eagle in a dovecote, I
Fluttered your Volscians in Corioles,
Alone I did it. "Boy"!

AUFIDIUS  Why, noble lords,
Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune,
Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart,
'Fore your own eyes and ears?

ALL CONSPIRATORS  Let him die for 't.

ALL PEOPLE  Tear him to pieces! Do it presently! He
killed my son! My daughter! He killed my cousin
Marcus! He killed my father!

SECOND LORD  Peace, ho! No outrage! Peace!
The man is noble, and his fame folds in
This orb o' th' Earth. His last offenses to us
Shall have judicious hearing. Stand, Aufidius,
And trouble not the peace.

CORIOLANUS, [drawing his sword]  O, that I had him,
With six Aufidiuses, or more, his tribe,
To use my lawful sword.

AUFIDIUS  Insolent villain!

ALL CONSPIRATORS  Kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!

[Draw the Conspirators, and kills Martius, who falls.
Aufidius stands on him.]



LORDS  Hold, hold, hold, hold!

AUFIDIUS
My noble masters, hear me speak.

FIRST LORD  O Tullus!

SECOND LORD
Thou hast done a deed whereat valor will weep.

THIRD LORD
Tread not upon him.--Masters, all be quiet.--
Put up your swords.

AUFIDIUS
My lords, when you shall know--as in this rage,
Provoked by him, you cannot--the great danger
Which this man's life did owe you, you'll rejoice
That he is thus cut off. Please it your Honors
To call me to your senate, I'll deliver
Myself your loyal servant or endure
Your heaviest censure.

FIRST LORD  Bear from hence his body,
And mourn you for him. Let him be regarded
As the most noble corse that ever herald
Did follow to his urn.

SECOND LORD  His own impatience
Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame.
Let's make the best of it.

AUFIDIUS  My rage is gone,
And I am struck with sorrow.--Take him up.
Help, three o' th' chiefest soldiers; I'll be one.--
Beat thou the drum that it speak mournfully.--
Trail your steel pikes. Though in this city he
Hath widowed and unchilded many a one,
Which to this hour bewail the injury,
Yet he shall have a noble memory.
Assist.
[They exit bearing the body of Martius.
A dead march sounded.]
Cymbeline
by William Shakespeare
Edited by Barbara A. Mowat and Paul Werstine
  with Michael Poston and Rebecca Niles
Folger Shakespeare Library
https://shakespeare.folger.edu/shakespeares-works/cymbeline/
Created on Jul 31, 2015, from FDT version 0.9.2

Characters in the Play
======================
CYMBELINE, King of Britain
Cymbeline's QUEEN
IMOGEN, daughter to Cymbeline by his former queen
POSTHUMUS LEONATUS, husband to Imogen
CLOTEN, son to the present queen by a former husband
PISANIO, Posthumus's servant
CORNELIUS, a physician in Cymbeline's court
PHILARIO, Posthumus's host in Rome
IACHIMO, friend to Philario
A FRENCHMAN, friend to Philario
CAIUS LUCIUS, a Roman general
BELARIUS, an exiled nobleman
Sons to Cymbeline by his former queen:
  GUIDERIUS
  ARVIRAGUS
Two LORDS attending Cloten
Two GENTLEMEN of Cymbeline's court
A LADY, Imogen's attendant
A LADY, the Queen's attendant
A Briton LORD
Two Briton CAPTAINS
Two JAILERS
Two MESSENGERS
Two Roman SENATORS
TRIBUNES
Roman CAPTAINS
A SOOTHSAYER
JUPITER
The Ghost of SICILIUS LEONATUS, Posthumus's father
The Ghost of Posthumus's MOTHER
The Ghosts of Posthumus's two BROTHERS
Lords, Ladies, Attendants, Musicians, a Dutchman, a Spaniard, Senators, Tribunes, Captains, and Soldiers


ACT 1
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter two Gentlemen.]


FIRST GENTLEMAN
You do not meet a man but frowns. Our bloods
No more obey the heavens than our courtiers'
Still seem as does the King's.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  But what's the matter?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
His daughter, and the heir of 's kingdom, whom
He purposed to his wife's sole son--a widow
That late he married--hath referred herself
Unto a poor but worthy gentleman. She's wedded,
Her husband banished, she imprisoned. All
Is outward sorrow, though I think the King
Be touched at very heart.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  None but the King?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
He that hath lost her, too. So is the Queen,
That most desired the match. But not a courtier,
Although they wear their faces to the bent
Of the King's looks, hath a heart that is not
Glad at the thing they scowl at.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  And why so?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
He that hath missed the Princess is a thing
Too bad for bad report, and he that hath her--
I mean, that married her, alack, good man!
And therefore banished--is a creature such
As, to seek through the regions of the Earth
For one his like, there would be something failing
In him that should compare. I do not think
So fair an outward and such stuff within
Endows a man but he.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  You speak him far.

FIRST GENTLEMAN
I do extend him, sir, within himself,
Crush him together rather than unfold
His measure duly.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  What's his name and birth?

FIRST GENTLEMAN
I cannot delve him to the root. His father
Was called Sicilius, who did join his honor
Against the Romans with Cassibelan,
But had his titles by Tenantius, whom
He served with glory and admired success,
So gained the sur-addition Leonatus;
And had, besides this gentleman in question,
Two other sons, who in the wars o' th' time
Died with their swords in hand. For which their
father,
Then old and fond of issue, took such sorrow
That he quit being; and his gentle lady,
Big of this gentleman our theme, deceased
As he was born. The King he takes the babe
To his protection, calls him Posthumus Leonatus,
Breeds him and makes him of his bedchamber,
Puts to him all the learnings that his time
Could make him the receiver of, which he took
As we do air, fast as 'twas ministered,
And in 's spring became a harvest; lived in court--
Which rare it is to do--most praised, most loved,
A sample to the youngest, to th' more mature
A glass that feated them, and to the graver
A child that guided dotards. To his mistress,
For whom he now is banished, her own price
Proclaims how she esteemed him; and his virtue
By her election may be truly read
What kind of man he is.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  I honor him
Even out of your report. But pray you tell me,
Is she sole child to th' King?

FIRST GENTLEMAN  His only child.
He had two sons--if this be worth your hearing,
Mark it--the eldest of them at three years old,
I' th' swathing clothes the other, from their nursery
Were stol'n, and to this hour no guess in knowledge
Which way they went.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  How long is this ago?

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Some twenty years.

SECOND GENTLEMAN
That a king's children should be so conveyed,
So slackly guarded, and the search so slow
That could not trace them!

FIRST GENTLEMAN  Howsoe'er 'tis strange,
Or that the negligence may well be laughed at,
Yet is it true, sir.

SECOND GENTLEMAN  I do well believe you.

FIRST GENTLEMAN
We must forbear. Here comes the gentleman,
The Queen and Princess.
[They exit.]

[Enter the Queen, Posthumus, and Imogen.]


QUEEN
No, be assured you shall not find me, daughter,
After the slander of most stepmothers,
Evil-eyed unto you. You're my prisoner, but
Your jailer shall deliver you the keys
That lock up your restraint.--For you, Posthumus,
So soon as I can win th' offended king,
I will be known your advocate. Marry, yet
The fire of rage is in him, and 'twere good
You leaned unto his sentence with what patience
Your wisdom may inform you.

POSTHUMUS  Please your Highness,
I will from hence today.

QUEEN  You know the peril.
I'll fetch a turn about the garden, pitying
The pangs of barred affections, though the King
Hath charged you should not speak together.	[She exits.]

IMOGEN  O,
Dissembling courtesy! How fine this tyrant
Can tickle where she wounds! My dearest husband,
I something fear my father's wrath, but nothing--
Always reserved my holy duty--what
His rage can do on me. You must be gone,
And I shall here abide the hourly shot
Of angry eyes, not comforted to live
But that there is this jewel in the world
That I may see again.	[She weeps.]

POSTHUMUS  My queen, my mistress!
O lady, weep no more, lest I give cause
To be suspected of more tenderness
Than doth become a man. I will remain
The loyal'st husband that did e'er plight troth.
My residence in Rome at one Philario's,
Who to my father was a friend, to me
Known but by letter; thither write, my queen,
And with mine eyes I'll drink the words you send,
Though ink be made of gall.

[Enter Queen.]


QUEEN  Be brief, I pray you.
If the King come, I shall incur I know not
How much of his displeasure. [(Aside.)] Yet I'll move
him
To walk this way. I never do him wrong
But he does buy my injuries, to be friends,
Pays dear for my offenses.	[She exits.]

POSTHUMUS  Should we be taking leave
As long a term as yet we have to live,
The loathness to depart would grow. Adieu.

IMOGEN  Nay, stay a little!
Were you but riding forth to air yourself,
Such parting were too petty. Look here, love:
This diamond was my mother's. [(She offers a
ring.)] Take it, heart,
But keep it till you woo another wife
When Imogen is dead.

POSTHUMUS  How, how? Another?
You gentle gods, give me but this I have,
And cere up my embracements from a next
With bonds of death.	[(He puts the ring on his finger.)]
Remain, remain thou here,
While sense can keep it on.--And sweetest, fairest,
As I my poor self did exchange for you
To your so infinite loss, so in our trifles
I still win of you. For my sake, wear this.
[He offers a bracelet.]
It is a manacle of love. I'll place it
Upon this fairest prisoner.	[He puts it on her wrist.]

IMOGEN  O the gods!
When shall we see again?

[Enter Cymbeline and Lords.]


POSTHUMUS  Alack, the King.

CYMBELINE
Thou basest thing, avoid hence, from my sight!
If after this command thou fraught the court
With thy unworthiness, thou diest. Away!
Thou 'rt poison to my blood.

POSTHUMUS  The gods protect you,
And bless the good remainders of the court.
I am gone.	[He exits.]

IMOGEN  There cannot be a pinch in death
More sharp than this is.

CYMBELINE  O disloyal thing
That shouldst repair my youth, thou heap'st
A year's age on me.

IMOGEN  I beseech you, sir,
Harm not yourself with your vexation.
I am senseless of your wrath. A touch more rare
Subdues all pangs, all fears.

CYMBELINE  Past grace? Obedience?

IMOGEN
Past hope and in despair; that way past grace.

CYMBELINE
That mightst have had the sole son of my queen!

IMOGEN
O, blessed that I might not! I chose an eagle
And did avoid a puttock.

CYMBELINE
Thou took'st a beggar, wouldst have made my throne
A seat for baseness.

IMOGEN  No, I rather added
A luster to it.

CYMBELINE  O thou vile one!

IMOGEN  Sir,
It is your fault that I have loved Posthumus.
You bred him as my playfellow, and he is
A man worth any woman, overbuys me
Almost the sum he pays.

CYMBELINE  What, art thou mad?

IMOGEN
Almost, sir. Heaven restore me! Would I were
A neatherd's daughter, and my Leonatus
Our neighbor shepherd's son.	[She weeps.]

CYMBELINE  Thou foolish thing!

[Enter Queen.]

They were again together. You have done
Not after our command. Away with her
And pen her up.

QUEEN  Beseech your patience.--Peace,
Dear lady daughter, peace.--Sweet sovereign,
Leave us to ourselves, and make yourself some
comfort
Out of your best advice.

CYMBELINE  Nay, let her languish
A drop of blood a day, and being aged
Die of this folly.	[He exits, with Lords.]

QUEEN  Fie, you must give way.

[Enter Pisanio.]

Here is your servant.--How now, sir? What news?

PISANIO
My lord your son drew on my master.

QUEEN  Ha?
No harm, I trust, is done?

PISANIO  There might have been,
But that my master rather played than fought
And had no help of anger. They were parted
By gentlemen at hand.

QUEEN  I am very glad on 't.

IMOGEN
Your son's my father's friend; he takes his part
To draw upon an exile. O, brave sir!
I would they were in Afric both together,
Myself by with a needle, that I might prick
The goer-back.--Why came you from your master?

PISANIO
On his command. He would not suffer me
To bring him to the haven, left these notes
Of what commands I should be subject to
When 't pleased you to employ me.

QUEEN, [to Imogen]  This hath been
Your faithful servant. I dare lay mine honor
He will remain so.

PISANIO  I humbly thank your Highness.

QUEEN, [to Imogen]
Pray, walk awhile.

IMOGEN, [to Pisanio]  About some half hour hence,
Pray you, speak with me. You shall at least
Go see my lord aboard. For this time leave me.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Cloten and two Lords.]


FIRST LORD  Sir, I would advise you to shift a shirt. The
violence of action hath made you reek as a sacrifice.
Where air comes out, air comes in. There's
none abroad so wholesome as that you vent.

CLOTEN  If my shirt were bloody, then to shift it. Have I
hurt him?

SECOND LORD, [aside]  No, faith, not so much as his
patience.

FIRST LORD  Hurt him? His body's a passable carcass if
he be not hurt. It is a thoroughfare for steel if it be
not hurt.

SECOND LORD, [aside]  His steel was in debt; it went o'
th' backside the town.

CLOTEN  The villain would not stand me.

SECOND LORD, [aside]  No, but he fled forward still,
toward your face.

FIRST LORD  Stand you? You have land enough of your
own, but he added to your having, gave you some
ground.

SECOND LORD, [aside]  As many inches as you have
oceans. Puppies!

CLOTEN  I would they had not come between us.

SECOND LORD, [aside]  So would I, till you had measured
how long a fool you were upon the ground.

CLOTEN  And that she should love this fellow and
refuse me!

SECOND LORD, [aside]  If it be a sin to make a true election,
she is damned.

FIRST LORD  Sir, as I told you always, her beauty and
her brain go not together. She's a good sign, but I
have seen small reflection of her wit.

SECOND LORD, [aside]  She shines not upon fools, lest
the reflection should hurt her.

CLOTEN  Come, I'll to my chamber. Would there had
been some hurt done!

SECOND LORD, [aside]  I wish not so, unless it had been
the fall of an ass, which is no great hurt.

CLOTEN  You'll go with us?

FIRST LORD  I'll attend your Lordship.

CLOTEN  Nay, come, let's go together.

SECOND LORD  Well, my lord.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Imogen and Pisanio.]


IMOGEN
I would thou grew'st unto the shores o' th' haven
And questionedst every sail. If he should write
And I not have it, 'twere a paper lost
As offered mercy is. What was the last
That he spake to thee?

PISANIO  It was his queen, his queen!

IMOGEN
Then waved his handkerchief?

PISANIO  And kissed it, madam.

IMOGEN
Senseless linen, happier therein than I.
And that was all?

PISANIO  No, madam. For so long
As he could make me with this eye or ear
Distinguish him from others, he did keep
The deck, with glove or hat or handkerchief
Still waving, as the fits and stirs of 's mind
Could best express how slow his soul sailed on,
How swift his ship.

IMOGEN  Thou shouldst have made him
As little as a crow, or less, ere left
To after-eye him.

PISANIO  Madam, so I did.

IMOGEN
I would have broke mine eyestrings, cracked them,
but
To look upon him till the diminution
Of space had pointed him sharp as my needle;
Nay, followed him till he had melted from
The smallness of a gnat to air; and then
Have turned mine eye and wept. But, good Pisanio,
When shall we hear from him?

PISANIO  Be assured, madam,
With his next vantage.

IMOGEN
I did not take my leave of him, but had
Most pretty things to say. Ere I could tell him
How I would think on him at certain hours
Such thoughts and such; or I could make him swear
The shes of Italy should not betray
Mine interest and his honor; or have charged him
At the sixth hour of morn, at noon, at midnight
T' encounter me with orisons, for then
I am in heaven for him; or ere I could
Give him that parting kiss which I had set
Betwixt two charming words, comes in my father,
And like the tyrannous breathing of the north
Shakes all our buds from growing.

[Enter a Lady.]


LADY  The Queen, madam,
Desires your Highness' company.

IMOGEN, [to Pisanio]
Those things I bid you do, get them dispatched.
I will attend the Queen.

PISANIO  Madam, I shall.
[They exit.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Philario, Iachimo, a Frenchman, a Dutchman,
and a Spaniard.]


IACHIMO  Believe it, sir, I have seen him in Britain. He
was then of a crescent note, expected to prove so
worthy as since he hath been allowed the name of.
But I could then have looked on him without the
help of admiration, though the catalogue of his
endowments had been tabled by his side and I to
peruse him by items.

PHILARIO  You speak of him when he was less furnished
than now he is with that which makes him
both without and within.

FRENCHMAN  I have seen him in France. We had very
many there could behold the sun with as firm eyes
as he.

IACHIMO  This matter of marrying his king's daughter,
wherein he must be weighed rather by her value
than his own, words him, I doubt not, a great deal
from the matter.

FRENCHMAN  And then his banishment.

IACHIMO  Ay, and the approbation of those that weep
this lamentable divorce under her colors are wonderfully
to extend him, be it but to fortify her judgment,
which else an easy battery might lay flat for
taking a beggar without less quality.--But how
comes it he is to sojourn with you? How creeps
acquaintance?

PHILARIO  His father and I were soldiers together, to
whom I have been often bound for no less than my
life.

[Enter Posthumus.]

Here comes the Briton. Let him be so entertained
amongst you as suits, with gentlemen of your knowing,
to a stranger of his quality.--I beseech you all,
be better known to this gentleman, whom I commend
to you as a noble friend of mine. How worthy
he is I will leave to appear hereafter rather
than story him in his own hearing.

FRENCHMAN, [to Posthumus]  Sir, we have known together
in Orleans.

POSTHUMUS  Since when I have been debtor to you for
courtesies which I will be ever to pay and yet pay
still.

FRENCHMAN  Sir, you o'errate my poor kindness. I was
glad I did atone my countryman and you. It had
been pity you should have been put together with
so mortal a purpose as then each bore, upon importance
of so slight and trivial a nature.

POSTHUMUS  By your pardon, sir, I was then a young
traveler, rather shunned to go even with what I
heard than in my every action to be guided by others'
experiences. But upon my mended judgment--
if I offend not to say it is mended--my
quarrel was not altogether slight.

FRENCHMAN  Faith, yes, to be put to the arbitrament of
swords, and by such two that would by all likelihood
have confounded one the other or have fall'n
both.

IACHIMO  Can we with manners ask what was the
difference?

FRENCHMAN  Safely, I think. 'Twas a contention in public,
which may without contradiction suffer the report.
It was much like an argument that fell out
last night, where each of us fell in praise of our
country mistresses, this gentleman at that time
vouching--and upon warrant of bloody affirmation--
his to be more fair, virtuous, wise, chaste,
constant, qualified, and less attemptable than any
the rarest of our ladies in France.

IACHIMO  That lady is not now living, or this gentleman's
opinion by this worn out.

POSTHUMUS  She holds her virtue still, and I my mind.

IACHIMO  You must not so far prefer her 'fore ours of
Italy.

POSTHUMUS  Being so far provoked as I was in France,
I would abate her nothing, though I profess myself
her adorer, not her friend.

IACHIMO  As fair and as good--a kind of hand-in-hand
comparison--had been something too fair and too
good for any lady in Britain. If she went before
others I have seen, as that diamond of yours outlusters
many I have beheld, I could not but
believe she excelled many. But I have not seen the
most precious diamond that is, nor you the lady.

POSTHUMUS  I praised her as I rated her. So do I my
stone.

IACHIMO  What do you esteem it at?

POSTHUMUS  More than the world enjoys.

IACHIMO  Either your unparagoned mistress is dead, or
she's outprized by a trifle.

POSTHUMUS  You are mistaken. The one may be sold or
given, or if there were wealth enough for the purchase
or merit for the gift. The other is not a thing
for sale, and only the gift of the gods.

IACHIMO  Which the gods have given you?

POSTHUMUS  Which, by their graces, I will keep.

IACHIMO  You may wear her in title yours, but you
know strange fowl light upon neighboring ponds.
Your ring may be stolen too. So your brace of unprizable
estimations, the one is but frail and the
other casual. A cunning thief or a that-way-accomplished
courtier would hazard the winning both of
first and last.

POSTHUMUS  Your Italy contains none so accomplished
a courtier to convince the honor of my mistress, if
in the holding or loss of that, you term her frail. I
do nothing doubt you have store of thieves;
notwithstanding, I fear not my ring.

PHILARIO  Let us leave here, gentlemen.

POSTHUMUS  Sir, with all my heart. This worthy signior,
I thank him, makes no stranger of me. We are
familiar at first.

IACHIMO  With five times so much conversation I
should get ground of your fair mistress, make her
go back even to the yielding, had I admittance and
opportunity to friend.

POSTHUMUS  No, no.

IACHIMO  I dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my
estate to your ring, which in my opinion o'ervalues
it something. But I make my wager rather against
your confidence than her reputation, and, to bar
your offense herein too, I durst attempt it against
any lady in the world.

POSTHUMUS  You are a great deal abused in too bold a
persuasion, and I doubt not you sustain what
you're worthy of by your attempt.

IACHIMO  What's that?

POSTHUMUS  A repulse--though your attempt, as you
call it, deserve more: a punishment, too.

PHILARIO  Gentlemen, enough of this. It came in too
suddenly. Let it die as it was born, and, I pray you,
be better acquainted.

IACHIMO  Would I had put my estate and my neighbor's
on th' approbation of what I have spoke.

POSTHUMUS  What lady would you choose to assail?

IACHIMO  Yours, whom in constancy you think stands
so safe. I will lay you ten thousand ducats to your
ring that, commend me to the court where your
lady is, with no more advantage than the opportunity
of a second conference, and I will bring from
thence that honor of hers which you imagine so
reserved.

POSTHUMUS  I will wage against your gold, gold to it.
My ring I hold dear as my finger; 'tis part of it.

IACHIMO  You are a friend, and therein the wiser. If you
buy ladies' flesh at a million a dram, you cannot
preserve it from tainting. But I see you have some
religion in you, that you fear.

POSTHUMUS  This is but a custom in your tongue. You
bear a graver purpose, I hope.

IACHIMO  I am the master of my speeches and would
undergo what's spoken, I swear.

POSTHUMUS  Will you? I shall but lend my diamond till
your return. Let there be covenants drawn between
's. My mistress exceeds in goodness the hugeness
of your unworthy thinking. I dare you to this
match. Here's my ring.

PHILARIO  I will have it no lay.

IACHIMO  By the gods, it is one!--If I bring you no sufficient
testimony that I have enjoyed the dearest
bodily part of your mistress, my ten thousand
ducats are yours; so is your diamond too. If I come
off and leave her in such honor as you have trust
in, she your jewel, this your jewel, and my gold are
yours, provided I have your commendation for my
more free entertainment.

POSTHUMUS  I embrace these conditions. Let us have
articles betwixt us. Only thus far you shall answer:
if you make your voyage upon her and give me directly
to understand you have prevailed, I am no
further your enemy; she is not worth our debate. If
she remain unseduced, you not making it appear
otherwise, for your ill opinion and th' assault you
have made to her chastity, you shall answer me
with your sword.

IACHIMO  Your hand; a covenant.	[(They shake hands.)]
We will have these things set down by lawful counsel,
and straight away for Britain, lest the bargain
should catch cold and starve. I will fetch my gold
and have our two wagers recorded.

POSTHUMUS  Agreed.	[Iachimo and Posthumus exit.]

FRENCHMAN  Will this hold, think you?

PHILARIO  Signior Iachimo will not from it. Pray, let us
follow 'em.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Queen, Ladies, and Cornelius.]


QUEEN
Whiles yet the dew's on ground, gather those flowers.
Make haste. Who has the note of them?

LADY  I, madam.

QUEEN  Dispatch.	[Ladies exit.]
Now, Master Doctor, have you brought those drugs?

CORNELIUS
Pleaseth your Highness, ay. Here they are, madam.
[He hands her a small box.]
But I beseech your Grace, without offense--
My conscience bids me ask--wherefore you have
Commanded of me these most poisonous
compounds,
Which are the movers of a languishing death,
But though slow, deadly.

QUEEN  I wonder, doctor,
Thou ask'st me such a question. Have I not been
Thy pupil long? Hast thou not learned me how
To make perfumes, distil, preserve--yea, so
That our great king himself doth woo me oft
For my confections? Having thus far proceeded,
Unless thou think'st me devilish, is 't not meet
That I did amplify my judgment in
Other conclusions? I will try the forces
Of these thy compounds on such creatures as
We count not worth the hanging--but none human--
To try the vigor of them and apply
Allayments to their act, and by them gather
Their several virtues and effects.

CORNELIUS  Your Highness
Shall from this practice but make hard your heart.
Besides, the seeing these effects will be
Both noisome and infectious.

QUEEN  O, content thee.

[Enter Pisanio.]

[Aside.] Here comes a flattering rascal. Upon him
Will I first work. He's for his master
And enemy to my son.--How now, Pisanio?--
Doctor, your service for this time is ended.
Take your own way.

CORNELIUS, [aside]  I do suspect you, madam,
But you shall do no harm.

QUEEN, [to Pisanio]  Hark thee, a word.

CORNELIUS, [aside]
I do not like her. She doth think she has
Strange ling'ring poisons. I do know her spirit,
And will not trust one of her malice with
A drug of such damned nature. Those she has
Will stupefy and dull the sense awhile,
Which first perchance she'll prove on cats and dogs,
Then afterward up higher. But there is
No danger in what show of death it makes,
More than the locking-up the spirits a time,
To be more fresh, reviving. She is fooled
With a most false effect, and I the truer
So to be false with her.

QUEEN  No further service, doctor,
Until I send for thee.

CORNELIUS  I humbly take my leave.	[He exits.]

QUEEN
Weeps she still, sayst thou? Dost thou think in time
She will not quench and let instructions enter
Where folly now possesses? Do thou work.
When thou shalt bring me word she loves my son,
I'll tell thee on the instant thou art then
As great as is thy master; greater, for
His fortunes all lie speechless, and his name
Is at last gasp. Return he cannot, nor
Continue where he is. To shift his being
Is to exchange one misery with another,
And every day that comes comes to decay
A day's work in him. What shalt thou expect,
To be depender on a thing that leans,
Who cannot be new built, nor has no friends
So much as but to prop him? [(She drops the box
and Pisanio picks it up.)] Thou tak'st up
Thou know'st not what. But take it for thy labor.
It is a thing I made which hath the King
Five times redeemed from death. I do not know
What is more cordial. Nay, I prithee, take it.
It is an earnest of a farther good
That I mean to thee. Tell thy mistress how
The case stands with her. Do 't as from thyself.
Think what a chance thou changest on, but think
Thou hast thy mistress still; to boot, my son,
Who shall take notice of thee. I'll move the King
To any shape of thy preferment such
As thou 'lt desire; and then myself, I chiefly,
That set thee on to this desert, am bound
To load thy merit richly. Call my women.
Think on my words.	[Pisanio exits.]
A sly and constant knave,
Not to be shaked; the agent for his master
And the remembrancer of her to hold
The handfast to her lord. I have given him that
Which, if he take, shall quite unpeople her
Of liegers for her sweet, and which she after,
Except she bend her humor, shall be assured
To taste of too.

[Enter Pisanio and Ladies carrying flowers.]

[To the Ladies.] So, so. Well done, well done.
The violets, cowslips, and the primroses
Bear to my closet.--Fare thee well, Pisanio.
Think on my words.	[Queen and Ladies exit.]

PISANIO  And shall do.
But when to my good lord I prove untrue,
I'll choke myself; there's all I'll do for you.
[He exits.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Imogen alone.]


IMOGEN
A father cruel and a stepdame false,
A foolish suitor to a wedded lady
That hath her husband banished. O, that husband,
My supreme crown of grief and those repeated
Vexations of it! Had I been thief-stol'n,
As my two brothers, happy; but most miserable
Is the desire that's glorious. Blessed be those,
How mean soe'er, that have their honest wills,
Which seasons comfort. Who may this be? Fie!

[Enter Pisanio and Iachimo.]


PISANIO
Madam, a noble gentleman of Rome
Comes from my lord with letters.

IACHIMO  Change you,
madam?
The worthy Leonatus is in safety
And greets your Highness dearly.
[He gives her a letter.]

IMOGEN  Thanks, good sir.
You're kindly welcome.

IACHIMO, [aside]
All of her that is out of door, most rich!
If she be furnished with a mind so rare,
She is alone th' Arabian bird, and I
Have lost the wager. Boldness be my friend.
Arm me, audacity, from head to foot,
Or like the Parthian I shall flying fight--
Rather, directly fly.

IMOGEN [reads:]  He is one of the noblest note, to whose
kindnesses I am most infinitely tied. Reflect upon
him accordingly as you value your trust.
Leonatus.
So far I read aloud.
But even the very middle of my heart
Is warmed by th' rest and takes it thankfully.--
You are as welcome, worthy sir, as I
Have words to bid you, and shall find it so
In all that I can do.

IACHIMO  Thanks, fairest lady.--
What, are men mad? Hath nature given them eyes
To see this vaulted arch and the rich crop
Of sea and land, which can distinguish 'twixt
The fiery orbs above and the twinned stones
Upon the numbered beach, and can we not
Partition make with spectacles so precious
'Twixt fair and foul?

IMOGEN  What makes your admiration?

IACHIMO
It cannot be i' th' eye, for apes and monkeys
'Twixt two such shes would chatter this way and
Contemn with mows the other; nor i' th' judgment,
For idiots in this case of favor would
Be wisely definite; nor i' th' appetite--
Sluttery to such neat excellence opposed
Should make desire vomit emptiness,
Not so allured to feed.

IMOGEN
What is the matter, trow?

IACHIMO  The cloyed will,
That satiate yet unsatisfied desire, that tub
Both filled and running, ravening first the lamb,
Longs after for the garbage.

IMOGEN  What, dear sir,
Thus raps you? Are you well?

IACHIMO  Thanks, madam, well.
[(To Pisanio.)] Beseech you, sir,
Desire my man's abode where I did leave him.
He's strange and peevish.

PISANIO  I was going, sir,
To give him welcome.	[He exits.]

IMOGEN
Continues well my lord? His health, beseech you?

IACHIMO  Well, madam.

IMOGEN
Is he disposed to mirth? I hope he is.

IACHIMO
Exceeding pleasant. None a stranger there
So merry and so gamesome. He is called
The Briton Reveler.

IMOGEN  When he was here
He did incline to sadness, and ofttimes
Not knowing why.

IACHIMO  I never saw him sad.
There is a Frenchman his companion, one
An eminent monsieur that, it seems, much loves
A Gallian girl at home. He furnaces
The thick sighs from him, whiles the jolly Briton--
Your lord, I mean--laughs from 's free lungs, cries "O,
Can my sides hold to think that man who knows
By history, report, or his own proof
What woman is, yea, what she cannot choose
But must be, will 's free hours languish for
Assured bondage?"

IMOGEN  Will my lord say so?

IACHIMO
Ay, madam, with his eyes in flood with laughter.
It is a recreation to be by
And hear him mock the Frenchman. But heavens
know
Some men are much to blame.

IMOGEN  Not he, I hope.

IACHIMO
Not he--but yet heaven's bounty towards him might
Be used more thankfully. In himself 'tis much;
In you, which I account his, beyond all talents.
Whilst I am bound to wonder, I am bound
To pity too.

IMOGEN  What do you pity, sir?

IACHIMO
Two creatures heartily.

IMOGEN  Am I one, sir?
You look on me. What wrack discern you in me
Deserves your pity?

IACHIMO  Lamentable! What,
To hide me from the radiant sun and solace
I' th' dungeon by a snuff?

IMOGEN  I pray you, sir,
Deliver with more openness your answers
To my demands. Why do you pity me?

IACHIMO  That others do--
I was about to say, enjoy your--but
It is an office of the gods to venge it,
Not mine to speak on 't.

IMOGEN  You do seem to know
Something of me or what concerns me. Pray you,
Since doubting things go ill often hurts more
Than to be sure they do--for certainties
Either are past remedies, or, timely knowing,
The remedy then born--discover to me
What both you spur and stop.

IACHIMO  Had I this cheek
To bathe my lips upon; this hand, whose touch,
Whose every touch, would force the feeler's soul
To th' oath of loyalty; this object which
Takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye,
Fixing it only here; should I, damned then,
Slaver with lips as common as the stairs
That mount the Capitol, join gripes with hands
Made hard with hourly falsehood--falsehood as
With labor; then by-peeping in an eye
Base and illustrous as the smoky light
That's fed with stinking tallow; it were fit
That all the plagues of hell should at one time
Encounter such revolt.

IMOGEN  My lord, I fear,
Has forgot Britain.

IACHIMO  And himself. Not I,
Inclined to this intelligence, pronounce
The beggary of his change, but 'tis your graces
That from my mutest conscience to my tongue
Charms this report out.

IMOGEN  Let me hear no more.

IACHIMO
O dearest soul, your cause doth strike my heart
With pity that doth make me sick. A lady
So fair, and fastened to an empery
Would make the great'st king double, to be partnered
With tomboys hired with that self exhibition
Which your own coffers yield, with diseased ventures
That play with all infirmities for gold
Which rottenness can lend nature; such boiled stuff
As well might poison poison. Be revenged,
Or she that bore you was no queen, and you
Recoil from your great stock.

IMOGEN  Revenged?
How should I be revenged? If this be true--
As I have such a heart that both mine ears
Must not in haste abuse--if it be true,
How should I be revenged?

IACHIMO  Should he make me
Live like Diana's priest betwixt cold sheets,
Whiles he is vaulting variable ramps,
In your despite, upon your purse? Revenge it.
I dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure,
More noble than that runagate to your bed,
And will continue fast to your affection,
Still close as sure.

IMOGEN  What ho, Pisanio!

IACHIMO
Let me my service tender on your lips.

IMOGEN
Away! I do condemn mine ears that have
So long attended thee. If thou wert honorable,
Thou wouldst have told this tale for virtue, not
For such an end thou seek'st, as base as strange.
Thou wrong'st a gentleman who is as far
From thy report as thou from honor, and
Solicits here a lady that disdains
Thee and the devil alike.--What ho, Pisanio!--
The King my father shall be made acquainted
Of thy assault. If he shall think it fit
A saucy stranger in his court to mart
As in a Romish stew and to expound
His beastly mind to us, he hath a court
He little cares for and a daughter who
He not respects at all.--What ho, Pisanio!

IACHIMO
O happy Leonatus! I may say
The credit that thy lady hath of thee
Deserves thy trust, and thy most perfect goodness
Her assured credit.--Blessed live you long,
A lady to the worthiest sir that ever
Country called his; and you his mistress, only
For the most worthiest fit. Give me your pardon.
I have spoke this to know if your affiance
Were deeply rooted, and shall make your lord
That which he is, new o'er; and he is one
The truest mannered, such a holy witch
That he enchants societies into him.
Half all men's hearts are his.

IMOGEN  You make amends.

IACHIMO
He sits 'mongst men like a descended god.
He hath a kind of honor sets him off
More than a mortal seeming. Be not angry,
Most mighty princess, that I have adventured
To try your taking of a false report, which hath
Honored with confirmation your great judgment
In the election of a sir so rare,
Which you know cannot err. The love I bear him
Made me to fan you thus, but the gods made you,
Unlike all others, chaffless. Pray, your pardon.

IMOGEN
All's well, sir. Take my power i' th' court for yours.

IACHIMO
My humble thanks. I had almost forgot
T' entreat your Grace but in a small request,
And yet of moment too, for it concerns.
Your lord, myself, and other noble friends
Are partners in the business.

IMOGEN  Pray, what is 't?

IACHIMO
Some dozen Romans of us and your lord--
The best feather of our wing--have mingled sums
To buy a present for the Emperor;
Which I, the factor for the rest, have done
In France. 'Tis plate of rare device and jewels
Of rich and exquisite form, their values great.
And I am something curious, being strange,
To have them in safe stowage. May it please you
To take them in protection?

IMOGEN  Willingly;
And pawn mine honor for their safety. Since
My lord hath interest in them, I will keep them
In my bedchamber.

IACHIMO  They are in a trunk
Attended by my men. I will make bold
To send them to you, only for this night.
I must aboard tomorrow.

IMOGEN  O no, no.

IACHIMO
Yes, I beseech, or I shall short my word
By length'ning my return. From Gallia
I crossed the seas on purpose and on promise
To see your Grace.

IMOGEN  I thank you for your pains.
But not away tomorrow.

IACHIMO  O, I must, madam.
Therefore I shall beseech you, if you please
To greet your lord with writing, do 't tonight.
I have outstood my time, which is material
To th' tender of our present.

IMOGEN  I will write.
Send your trunk to me; it shall safe be kept
And truly yielded you. You're very welcome.
[They exit.]


ACT 2
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Cloten and the two Lords.]


CLOTEN  Was there ever man had such luck? When I
kissed the jack, upon an upcast to be hit away? I
had a hundred pound on 't. And then a whoreson
jackanapes must take me up for swearing, as if I
borrowed mine oaths of him and might not spend
them at my pleasure.

FIRST LORD  What got he by that? You have broke his
pate with your bowl.

SECOND LORD, [aside]  If his wit had been like him that
broke it, it would have run all out.

CLOTEN  When a gentleman is disposed to swear, it is
not for any standers-by to curtail his oaths, ha?

SECOND LORD  No, my lord, [(aside)] nor crop the ears
of them.

CLOTEN  Whoreson dog! I gave him satisfaction. Would
he had been one of my rank.

SECOND LORD, [aside]  To have smelled like a fool.

CLOTEN  I am not vexed more at anything in th' Earth.
A pox on 't! I had rather not be so noble as I am.
They dare not fight with me because of the Queen
my mother. Every jack-slave hath his bellyful of
fighting, and I must go up and down like a cock
that nobody can match.

SECOND LORD, [aside]  You are cock and capon too, and
you crow cock with your comb on.

CLOTEN  Sayest thou?

SECOND LORD  It is not fit your Lordship should undertake
every companion that you give offense to.

CLOTEN  No, I know that, but it is fit I should commit
offense to my inferiors.

SECOND LORD  Ay, it is fit for your Lordship only.

CLOTEN  Why, so I say.

FIRST LORD  Did you hear of a stranger that's come to
court tonight?

CLOTEN  A stranger, and I not know on 't?

SECOND LORD, [aside]  He's a strange fellow himself and
knows it not.

FIRST LORD  There's an Italian come, and 'tis thought
one of Leonatus' friends.

CLOTEN  Leonatus? A banished rascal; and he's another,
whatsoever he be. Who told you of this stranger?

FIRST LORD  One of your Lordship's pages.

CLOTEN  Is it fit I went to look upon him? Is there no
derogation in 't?

SECOND LORD  You cannot derogate, my lord.

CLOTEN  Not easily, I think.

SECOND LORD, [aside]  You are a fool granted; therefore
your issues, being foolish, do not derogate.

CLOTEN  Come, I'll go see this Italian. What I have lost
today at bowls I'll win tonight of him. Come, go.

SECOND LORD  I'll attend your Lordship.
[Cloten and First Lord exit.]
That such a crafty devil as is his mother
Should yield the world this ass! A woman that
Bears all down with her brain, and this her son
Cannot take two from twenty, for his heart,
And leave eighteen. Alas, poor princess,
Thou divine Imogen, what thou endur'st,
Betwixt a father by thy stepdame governed,
A mother hourly coining plots, a wooer
More hateful than the foul expulsion is
Of thy dear husband, than that horrid act
Of the divorce he'd make! The heavens hold firm
The walls of thy dear honor, keep unshaked
That temple, thy fair mind, that thou mayst stand
T' enjoy thy banished lord and this great land.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[A trunk is brought in. Enter Imogen, reading, in her
bed, and a Lady.]


IMOGEN
Who's there? My woman Helen?

LADY  Please you, madam.

IMOGEN
What hour is it?

LADY  Almost midnight, madam.

IMOGEN
I have read three hours then. Mine eyes are weak.
[She hands the Lady her book.]
Fold down the leaf where I have left. To bed.
Take not away the taper; leave it burning.
And if thou canst awake by four o' th' clock,
I prithee, call me. [(Lady exits.)] Sleep hath seized
me wholly.
To your protection I commend me, gods.
From fairies and the tempters of the night
Guard me, beseech you.	[Sleeps.]

[Iachimo from the trunk.]


IACHIMO
The crickets sing, and man's o'erlabored sense
Repairs itself by rest. Our Tarquin thus
Did softly press the rushes ere he wakened
The chastity he wounded.--Cytherea,
How bravely thou becom'st thy bed, fresh lily,
And whiter than the sheets.--That I might touch!
But kiss, one kiss! Rubies unparagoned,
How dearly they do 't. 'Tis her breathing that
Perfumes the chamber thus. The flame o' th' taper
Bows toward her and would underpeep her lids
To see th' enclosed lights, now canopied
Under these windows, white and azure-laced
With blue of heaven's own tinct. But my design:
To note the chamber. I will write all down.
[He begins to write.]
Such and such pictures; there the window; such
Th' adornment of her bed; the arras, figures,
Why, such and such; and the contents o' th' story.
[He continues to write.]
Ah, but some natural notes about her body
Above ten thousand meaner movables
Would testify t' enrich mine inventory.
O sleep, thou ape of death, lie dull upon her,
And be her sense but as a monument
Thus in a chapel lying. [(He begins to remove her
bracelet.)] Come off, come off;
As slippery as the Gordian knot was hard.
'Tis mine, and this will witness outwardly
As strongly as the conscience does within
To th' madding of her lord. On her left breast
A mole cinque-spotted, like the crimson drops
I' th' bottom of a cowslip. Here's a voucher
Stronger than ever law could make. This secret
Will force him think I have picked the lock and ta'en
The treasure of her honor. No more. To what end?
Why should I write this down that's riveted,
Screwed to my memory? She hath been reading late
The tale of Tereus; here the leaf's turned down
Where Philomel gave up. I have enough.
To th' trunk again, and shut the spring of it.
Swift, swift, you dragons of the night, that dawning
May bare the raven's eye. I lodge in fear.
Though this a heavenly angel, hell is here.
[Clock strikes.]
One, two, three. Time, time!
[He exits into the trunk. The trunk
and bed are removed.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Cloten and Lords.]


FIRST LORD  Your Lordship is the most patient man in
loss, the most coldest that ever turned up ace.

CLOTEN  It would make any man cold to lose.

FIRST LORD  But not every man patient after the noble
temper of your Lordship. You are most hot and
furious when you win.

CLOTEN  Winning will put any man into courage. If I
could get this foolish Imogen, I should have gold
enough. It's almost morning, is 't not?

FIRST LORD  Day, my lord.

CLOTEN  I would this music would come. I am advised
to give her music a-mornings; they say it will
penetrate.

[Enter Musicians.]

Come on, tune. If you can penetrate her with your
fingering, so. We'll try with tongue, too. If none
will do, let her remain, but I'll never give o'er. First,
a very excellent good-conceited thing; after, a wonderful
sweet air, with admirable rich words to it,
and then let her consider.

[Musicians begin to play.]
Song.

	Hark, hark, the lark at heaven's gate sings,
	   And Phoebus gins arise,
	His steeds to water at those springs
	   On chaliced flowers that lies;
	And winking Mary-buds begin
	   To ope their golden eyes.
	With everything that pretty is,
	   My lady sweet, arise,
	      Arise, arise.

CLOTEN  So, get you gone. If this penetrate, I will
consider your music the better. If it do not, it is a
vice in her ears which horsehairs and calves'
guts, nor the voice of unpaved eunuch to boot, can
never amend.
[Musicians exit.]

[Enter Cymbeline and Queen, with Attendants.]


SECOND LORD  Here comes the King.

CLOTEN  I am glad I was up so late, for that's the reason
I was up so early. He cannot choose but take this
service I have done fatherly.--Good morrow to
your Majesty and to my gracious mother.

CYMBELINE
Attend you here the door of our stern daughter?
Will she not forth?

CLOTEN  I have assailed her with musics, but she
vouchsafes no notice.

CYMBELINE
The exile of her minion is too new;
She hath not yet forgot him. Some more time
Must wear the print of his remembrance on 't,
And then she's yours.

QUEEN, [to Cloten]  You are most bound to th' King,
Who lets go by no vantages that may
Prefer you to his daughter. Frame yourself
To orderly solicits and be friended
With aptness of the season. Make denials
Increase your services. So seem as if
You were inspired to do those duties which
You tender to her; that you in all obey her,
Save when command to your dismission tends,
And therein you are senseless.

CLOTEN  Senseless? Not so.

[Enter a Messenger.]


MESSENGER, [to Cymbeline]
So like you, sir, ambassadors from Rome;
The one is Caius Lucius.	[Messenger exits.]

CYMBELINE  A worthy fellow,
Albeit he comes on angry purpose now.
But that's no fault of his. We must receive him
According to the honor of his sender,
And towards himself, his goodness forespent on us,
We must extend our notice.--Our dear son,
When you have given good morning to your mistress,
Attend the Queen and us. We shall have need
T' employ you towards this Roman.--Come, our
queen.
[Cymbeline and Queen exit, with
Lords and Attendants.]

CLOTEN
If she be up, I'll speak with her; if not,
Let her lie still and dream. [(He knocks.)] By your
leave, ho!--
I know her women are about her. What
If I do line one of their hands? 'Tis gold
Which buys admittance--oft it doth--yea, and makes
Diana's rangers false themselves, yield up
Their deer to th' stand o' th' stealer; and 'tis gold
Which makes the true man killed and saves the thief,
Nay, sometime hangs both thief and true man. What
Can it not do and undo? I will make
One of her women lawyer to me, for
I yet not understand the case myself.
By your leave.	[Knocks.]

[Enter a Lady.]


LADY
Who's there that knocks?

CLOTEN  A gentleman.

LADY  No more?

CLOTEN
Yes, and a gentlewoman's son.

LADY  That's more
Than some whose tailors are as dear as yours
Can justly boast of. What's your Lordship's pleasure?

CLOTEN
Your lady's person. Is she ready?

LADY  Ay,
To keep her chamber.

CLOTEN  There is gold for you.
Sell me your good report.	[He offers a purse.]

LADY
How, my good name? Or to report of you
What I shall think is good?

[Enter Imogen.]

The Princess.
[Lady exits.]

CLOTEN
Good morrow, fairest sister. Your sweet hand.

IMOGEN
Good morrow, sir. You lay out too much pains
For purchasing but trouble. The thanks I give
Is telling you that I am poor of thanks
And scarce can spare them.

CLOTEN  Still I swear I love you.

IMOGEN
If you but said so, 'twere as deep with me.
If you swear still, your recompense is still
That I regard it not.

CLOTEN  This is no answer.

IMOGEN
But that you shall not say I yield being silent,
I would not speak. I pray you, spare me. Faith,
I shall unfold equal discourtesy
To your best kindness. One of your great knowing
Should learn, being taught, forbearance.

CLOTEN
To leave you in your madness 'twere my sin.
I will not.

IMOGEN
Fools are not mad folks.

CLOTEN  Do you call me fool?

IMOGEN  As I am mad, I do.
If you'll be patient, I'll no more be mad.
That cures us both. I am much sorry, sir,
You put me to forget a lady's manners
By being so verbal; and learn now for all
That I, which know my heart, do here pronounce,
By th' very truth of it, I care not for you,
And am so near the lack of charity
To accuse myself I hate you--which I had rather
You felt than make 't my boast.

CLOTEN  You sin against
Obedience, which you owe your father. For
The contract you pretend with that base wretch--
One bred of alms and fostered with cold dishes,
With scraps o' th' court--it is no contract, none;
And though it be allowed in meaner parties--
Yet who than he more mean?--to knit their souls,
On whom there is no more dependency
But brats and beggary, in self-figured knot;
Yet you are curbed from that enlargement by
The consequence o' th' crown, and must not foil
The precious note of it with a base slave,
A hilding for a livery, a squire's cloth,
A pantler--not so eminent.

IMOGEN  Profane fellow,
Wert thou the son of Jupiter and no more
But what thou art besides, thou wert too base
To be his groom. Thou wert dignified enough,
Even to the point of envy, if 'twere made
Comparative for your virtues to be styled
The under-hangman of his kingdom and hated
For being preferred so well.

CLOTEN  The south fog rot him!

IMOGEN
He never can meet more mischance than come
To be but named of thee. His mean'st garment
That ever hath but clipped his body is dearer
In my respect than all the hairs above thee,
Were they all made such men.--How now, Pisanio!

[Enter Pisanio.]


CLOTEN  "His garment"? Now the devil--

IMOGEN, [to Pisanio]
To Dorothy, my woman, hie thee presently.

CLOTEN
"His garment"?

IMOGEN, [to Pisanio]  I am sprighted with a fool,
Frighted and angered worse. Go bid my woman
Search for a jewel that too casually
Hath left mine arm. It was thy master's. Shrew me
If I would lose it for a revenue
Of any king's in Europe. I do think
I saw 't this morning. Confident I am
Last night 'twas on mine arm; I kissed it.
I hope it be not gone to tell my lord
That I kiss aught but he.

PISANIO  'Twill not be lost.

IMOGEN
I hope so. Go and search.	[Pisanio exits.]

CLOTEN  You have abused me.
"His meanest garment"?

IMOGEN  Ay, I said so, sir.
If you will make 't an action, call witness to 't.

CLOTEN
I will inform your father.

IMOGEN  Your mother too.
She's my good lady and will conceive, I hope,
But the worst of me. So I leave you, sir,
To th' worst of discontent.	[She exits.]

CLOTEN
I'll be revenged! "His mean'st garment"? Well.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Posthumus and Philario.]


POSTHUMUS
Fear it not, sir. I would I were so sure
To win the King as I am bold her honor
Will remain hers.

PHILARIO  What means do you make to him?

POSTHUMUS
Not any, but abide the change of time,
Quake in the present winter's state, and wish
That warmer days would come. In these feared
hopes
I barely gratify your love; they failing,
I must die much your debtor.

PHILARIO
Your very goodness and your company
O'erpays all I can do. By this, your king
Hath heard of great Augustus. Caius Lucius
Will do 's commission throughly. And I think
He'll grant the tribute, send th' arrearages,
Or look upon our Romans, whose remembrance
Is yet fresh in their grief.

POSTHUMUS  I do believe,
Statist though I am none nor like to be,
That this will prove a war; and you shall hear
The legion now in Gallia sooner landed
In our not-fearing Britain than have tidings
Of any penny tribute paid. Our countrymen
Are men more ordered than when Julius Caesar
Smiled at their lack of skill but found their courage
Worthy his frowning at. Their discipline,
Now winged with their courages, will make known
To their approvers they are people such
That mend upon the world.

[Enter Iachimo.]


PHILARIO  See, Iachimo!

POSTHUMUS
The swiftest harts have posted you by land,
And winds of all the corners kissed your sails
To make your vessel nimble.

PHILARIO  Welcome, sir.

POSTHUMUS
I hope the briefness of your answer made
The speediness of your return.

IACHIMO  Your lady
Is one of the fairest that I have looked upon.

POSTHUMUS
And therewithal the best, or let her beauty
Look thorough a casement to allure false hearts
And be false with them.

IACHIMO, [handing him a paper]  Here are letters for you.

POSTHUMUS
Their tenor good, I trust.

IACHIMO  'Tis very like.
[Posthumus reads the letter.]

PHILARIO
Was Caius Lucius in the Briton court
When you were there?

IACHIMO
He was expected then, but not approached.

POSTHUMUS  All is well yet.
Sparkles this stone as it was wont, or is 't not
Too dull for your good wearing?
[He indicates his ring.]

IACHIMO  If I have lost it,
I should have lost the worth of it in gold.
I'll make a journey twice as far t' enjoy
A second night of such sweet shortness which
Was mine in Britain, for the ring is won.

POSTHUMUS
The stone's too hard to come by.

IACHIMO  Not a whit,
Your lady being so easy.

POSTHUMUS  Make not, sir,
Your loss your sport. I hope you know that we
Must not continue friends.

IACHIMO  Good sir, we must,
If you keep covenant. Had I not brought
The knowledge of your mistress home, I grant
We were to question farther; but I now
Profess myself the winner of her honor,
Together with your ring, and not the wronger
Of her or you, having proceeded but
By both your wills.

POSTHUMUS  If you can make 't apparent
That you have tasted her in bed, my hand
And ring is yours. If not, the foul opinion
You had of her pure honor gains or loses
Your sword or mine, or masterless leave both
To who shall find them.

IACHIMO  Sir, my circumstances,
Being so near the truth as I will make them,
Must first induce you to believe; whose strength
I will confirm with oath, which I doubt not
You'll give me leave to spare when you shall find
You need it not.

POSTHUMUS  Proceed.

IACHIMO  First, her bedchamber--
Where I confess I slept not, but profess
Had that was well worth watching--it was hanged
With tapestry of silk and silver, the story
Proud Cleopatra when she met her Roman
And Cydnus swelled above the banks, or for
The press of boats or pride. A piece of work
So bravely done, so rich, that it did strive
In workmanship and value, which I wondered
Could be so rarely and exactly wrought
Since the true life on 't was--

POSTHUMUS  This is true,
And this you might have heard of here, by me
Or by some other.

IACHIMO  More particulars
Must justify my knowledge.

POSTHUMUS  So they must,
Or do your honor injury.

IACHIMO  The chimney
Is south the chamber, and the chimney-piece
Chaste Dian bathing. Never saw I figures
So likely to report themselves; the cutter
Was as another Nature, dumb, outwent her,
Motion and breath left out.

POSTHUMUS  This is a thing
Which you might from relation likewise reap,
Being, as it is, much spoke of.

IACHIMO  The roof o' th' chamber
With golden cherubins is fretted. Her andirons--
I had forgot them--were two winking Cupids
Of silver, each on one foot standing, nicely
Depending on their brands.

POSTHUMUS  This is her honor?
Let it be granted you have seen all this--and praise
Be given to your remembrance--the description
Of what is in her chamber nothing saves
The wager you have laid.

IACHIMO  Then if you can
Be pale, I beg but leave to air this jewel. See--
[He shows the bracelet.]
And now 'tis up again. It must be married
To that your diamond. I'll keep them.

POSTHUMUS  Jove!
Once more let me behold it. Is it that
Which I left with her?

IACHIMO  Sir, I thank her, that.
She stripped it from her arm. I see her yet.
Her pretty action did outsell her gift
And yet enriched it too. She gave it me
And said she prized it once.

POSTHUMUS  Maybe she plucked it off
To send it me.

IACHIMO  She writes so to you, doth she?

POSTHUMUS
O, no, no, no, 'tis true. Here, take this too.
[He gives Iachimo the ring.]
It is a basilisk unto mine eye,
Kills me to look on 't. Let there be no honor
Where there is beauty, truth where semblance, love
Where there's another man. The vows of women
Of no more bondage be to where they are made
Than they are to their virtues, which is nothing.
O, above measure false!

PHILARIO  Have patience, sir,
And take your ring again. 'Tis not yet won.
It may be probable she lost it; or
Who knows if one her women, being corrupted,
Hath stol'n it from her.

POSTHUMUS  Very true,
And so I hope he came by 't.--Back, my ring!
[He takes back the ring.]
Render to me some corporal sign about her
More evident than this, for this was stol'n.

IACHIMO
By Jupiter, I had it from her arm.

POSTHUMUS
Hark you, he swears! By Jupiter he swears.
'Tis true--nay, keep the ring--'tis true.
[He holds out the ring.]
I am sure
She would not lose it. Her attendants are
All sworn and honorable. They induced to steal it?
And by a stranger? No, he hath enjoyed her.
The cognizance of her incontinency
Is this. She hath bought the name of whore thus
dearly.
There, take thy hire, and all the fiends of hell
Divide themselves between you!
[He gives the ring to Iachimo.]

PHILARIO  Sir, be patient.
This is not strong enough to be believed
Of one persuaded well of.

POSTHUMUS  Never talk on 't.
She hath been colted by him.

IACHIMO  If you seek
For further satisfying, under her breast,
Worthy the pressing, lies a mole, right proud
Of that most delicate lodging. By my life,
I kissed it, and it gave me present hunger
To feed again, though full. You do remember
This stain upon her?

POSTHUMUS  Ay, and it doth confirm
Another stain as big as hell can hold,
Were there no more but it.

IACHIMO  Will you hear more?

POSTHUMUS  Spare your arithmetic;
Never count the turns. Once, and a million!

IACHIMO  I'll be sworn--

POSTHUMUS  No swearing.
If you will swear you have not done 't, you lie,
And I will kill thee if thou dost deny
Thou 'st made me cuckold.

IACHIMO  I'll deny nothing.

POSTHUMUS
O, that I had her here, to tear her limb-meal!
I will go there and do 't i' th' court, before
Her father. I'll do something.	[He exits.]

PHILARIO  Quite beside
The government of patience. You have won.
Let's follow him and pervert the present wrath
He hath against himself.

IACHIMO  With all my heart.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Posthumus.]


POSTHUMUS
Is there no way for men to be, but women
Must be half-workers? We are all bastards,
And that most venerable man which I
Did call my father was I know not where
When I was stamped. Some coiner with his tools
Made me a counterfeit; yet my mother seemed
The Dian of that time; so doth my wife
The nonpareil of this. O, vengeance, vengeance!
Me of my lawful pleasure she restrained
And prayed me oft forbearance; did it with
A pudency so rosy the sweet view on 't
Might well have warmed old Saturn, that I thought
her
As chaste as unsunned snow. O, all the devils!
This yellow Iachimo in an hour, was 't not?
Or less? At first? Perchance he spoke not, but,
Like a full-acorned boar, a German one,
Cried "O!" and mounted; found no opposition
But what he looked for should oppose and she
Should from encounter guard. Could I find out
The woman's part in me--for there's no motion
That tends to vice in man but I affirm
It is the woman's part: be it lying, note it,
The woman's; flattering, hers; deceiving, hers;
Lust and rank thoughts, hers, hers; revenges, hers;
Ambitions, covetings, change of prides, disdain,
Nice longing, slanders, mutability,
All faults that have a name, nay, that hell knows,
Why, hers, in part or all, but rather all.
For even to vice
They are not constant, but are changing still
One vice but of a minute old for one
Not half so old as that. I'll write against them,
Detest them, curse them. Yet 'tis greater skill
In a true hate to pray they have their will;
The very devils cannot plague them better.
[He exits.]


ACT 3
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter in state Cymbeline, Queen, Cloten, and Lords at
one door, and, at another, Caius Lucius and Attendants.]


CYMBELINE
Now say, what would Augustus Caesar with us?

LUCIUS
When Julius Caesar, whose remembrance yet
Lives in men's eyes and will to ears and tongues
Be theme and hearing ever, was in this Britain
And conquered it, Cassibelan, thine uncle,
Famous in Caesar's praises no whit less
Than in his feats deserving it, for him
And his succession granted Rome a tribute,
Yearly three thousand pounds, which by thee lately
Is left untendered.

QUEEN  And, to kill the marvel,
Shall be so ever.

CLOTEN  There be many Caesars
Ere such another Julius. Britain's a world
By itself, and we will nothing pay
For wearing our own noses.

QUEEN  That opportunity
Which then they had to take from 's, to resume
We have again.--Remember, sir, my liege,
The Kings your ancestors, together with
The natural bravery of your isle, which stands
As Neptune's park, ribbed and paled in
With rocks unscalable and roaring waters,
With sands that will not bear your enemies' boats
But suck them up to th' topmast. A kind of conquest
Caesar made here, but made not here his brag
Of "came, and saw, and overcame." With shame--
The first that ever touched him--he was carried
From off our coast, twice beaten; and his shipping,
Poor ignorant baubles, on our terrible seas
Like eggshells moved upon their surges, cracked
As easily 'gainst our rocks. For joy whereof
The famed Cassibelan, who was once at point--
O, giglet Fortune!--to master Caesar's sword,
Made Lud's Town with rejoicing fires bright
And Britons strut with courage.

CLOTEN  Come, there's no more tribute to be paid. Our
kingdom is stronger than it was at that time, and,
as I said, there is no more such Caesars. Other of
them may have crooked noses, but to owe such
straight arms, none.

CYMBELINE  Son, let your mother end.

CLOTEN  We have yet many among us can grip as hard
as Cassibelan. I do not say I am one, but I have a
hand. Why tribute? Why should we pay tribute? If
Caesar can hide the sun from us with a blanket or
put the moon in his pocket, we will pay him tribute
for light; else, sir, no more tribute, pray you now.

CYMBELINE, [to Lucius]  You must know,
Till the injurious Romans did extort
This tribute from us, we were free. Caesar's ambition,
Which swelled so much that it did almost stretch
The sides o' th' world, against all color here
Did put the yoke upon 's, which to shake off
Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon
Ourselves to be. We do say, then, to Caesar,
Our ancestor was that Mulmutius which
Ordained our laws, whose use the sword of Caesar
Hath too much mangled, whose repair and franchise
Shall, by the power we hold, be our good deed,
Though Rome be therefore angry. Mulmutius made
our laws,
Who was the first of Britain which did put
His brows within a golden crown and called
Himself a king.

LUCIUS  I am sorry, Cymbeline,
That I am to pronounce Augustus Caesar--
Caesar, that hath more kings his servants than
Thyself domestic officers--thine enemy.
Receive it from me, then: war and confusion
In Caesar's name pronounce I 'gainst thee. Look
For fury not to be resisted. Thus defied,
I thank thee for myself.

CYMBELINE  Thou art welcome, Caius.
Thy Caesar knighted me; my youth I spent
Much under him. Of him I gathered honor,
Which he to seek of me again perforce
Behooves me keep at utterance. I am perfect
That the Pannonians and Dalmatians for
Their liberties are now in arms, a precedent
Which not to read would show the Britons cold.
So Caesar shall not find them.

LUCIUS  Let proof speak.

CLOTEN  His Majesty bids you welcome. Make pastime
with us a day or two, or longer. If you seek us afterwards
in other terms, you shall find us in our saltwater
girdle; if you beat us out of it, it is yours. If
you fall in the adventure, our crows shall fare the
better for you, and there's an end.

LUCIUS  So, sir.

CYMBELINE
I know your master's pleasure, and he mine.
All the remain is welcome.
[They exit.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Pisanio reading of a letter.]


PISANIO
How? Of adultery? Wherefore write you not
What monsters her accuse? Leonatus,
O master, what a strange infection
Is fall'n into thy ear! What false Italian,
As poisonous-tongued as handed, hath prevailed
On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal? No.
She's punished for her truth and undergoes,
More goddesslike than wifelike, such assaults
As would take in some virtue. O my master,
Thy mind to her is now as low as were
Thy fortunes. How? That I should murder her,
Upon the love and truth and vows which I
Have made to thy command? I her? Her blood?
If it be so to do good service, never
Let me be counted serviceable. How look I
That I should seem to lack humanity
So much as this fact comes to? [(He reads:)] Do 't!
The letter
That I have sent her, by her own command
Shall give thee opportunity. O damned paper,
Black as the ink that's on thee! Senseless bauble,
Art thou a fedary for this act, and look'st
So virginlike without? Lo, here she comes.

[Enter Imogen.]

I am ignorant in what I am commanded.

IMOGEN  How now, Pisanio?

PISANIO
Madam, here is a letter from my lord.
[He gives her a paper.]

IMOGEN
Who, thy lord that is my lord, Leonatus?
O, learned indeed were that astronomer
That knew the stars as I his characters!
He'd lay the future open. You good gods,
Let what is here contained relish of love,
Of my lord's health, of his content (yet not
That we two are asunder; let that grieve him.
Some griefs are med'cinable; that is one of them,
For it doth physic love) of his content
All but in that. Good wax, thy leave.
[She opens the letter.]
Blest be
You bees that make these locks of counsel. Lovers
And men in dangerous bonds pray not alike;
Though forfeiters you cast in prison, yet
You clasp young Cupid's tables. Good news, gods!
[Reads.] Justice and your father's wrath, should he
take me in his dominion, could not be so cruel to me
as you, O the dearest of creatures, would even renew
me with your eyes. Take notice that I am in Cambria
at Milford Haven. What your own love will out of
this advise you, follow. So he wishes you all happiness,
that remains loyal to his vow, and your increasing
in love.
Leonatus Posthumus.
O, for a horse with wings! Hear'st thou, Pisanio?
He is at Milford Haven. Read, and tell me
How far 'tis thither. If one of mean affairs
May plod it in a week, why may not I
Glide thither in a day? Then, true Pisanio,
Who long'st like me to see thy lord, who long'st--
O, let me bate--but not like me, yet long'st
But in a fainter kind--O, not like me,
For mine's beyond beyond--say, and speak thick--
Love's counselor should fill the bores of hearing
To th' smothering of the sense--how far it is
To this same blessed Milford. And by th' way
Tell me how Wales was made so happy as
T' inherit such a haven. But first of all,
How we may steal from hence, and for the gap
That we shall make in time from our hence-going
And our return, to excuse. But first, how get hence?
Why should excuse be born or ere begot?
We'll talk of that hereafter. Prithee speak,
How many score of miles may we well rid
'Twixt hour and hour?

PISANIO  One score 'twixt sun and sun,
Madam, 's enough for you, and too much too.

IMOGEN
Why, one that rode to 's execution, man,
Could never go so slow. I have heard of riding wagers
Where horses have been nimbler than the sands
That run i' th' clock's behalf. But this is fool'ry.
Go, bid my woman feign a sickness, say
She'll home to her father; and provide me presently
A riding suit no costlier than would fit
A franklin's huswife.

PISANIO  Madam, you're best consider.

IMOGEN
I see before me, man. Nor here, nor here,
Nor what ensues, but have a fog in them
That I cannot look through. Away, I prithee.
Do as I bid thee. There's no more to say.
Accessible is none but Milford way.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter, as from a cave, Belarius as Morgan, Guiderius
as Polydor, and Arviragus as Cadwal.]


BELARIUS, [as Morgan]
A goodly day not to keep house with such
Whose roof's as low as ours! Stoop, boys. This gate
Instructs you how t' adore the heavens and bows you
To a morning's holy office. The gates of monarchs
Are arched so high that giants may jet through
And keep their impious turbans on, without
Good morrow to the sun. Hail, thou fair heaven!
We house i' th' rock, yet use thee not so hardly
As prouder livers do.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  Hail, heaven!

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  Hail, heaven!

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]
Now for our mountain sport. Up to yond hill;
Your legs are young. I'll tread these flats. Consider,
When you above perceive me like a crow,
That it is place which lessens and sets off,
And you may then revolve what tales I have told you
Of courts, of princes, of the tricks in war.
This service is not service, so being done,
But being so allowed. To apprehend thus
Draws us a profit from all things we see,
And often, to our comfort, shall we find
The sharded beetle in a safer hold
Than is the full-winged eagle. O, this life
Is nobler than attending for a check,
Richer than doing nothing for a robe,
Prouder than rustling in unpaid-for silk:
Such gain the cap of him that makes him fine
Yet keeps his book uncrossed. No life to ours.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
Out of your proof you speak. We poor unfledged
Have never winged from view o' th' nest, nor know
not
What air 's from home. Haply this life is best
If quiet life be best, sweeter to you
That have a sharper known, well corresponding
With your stiff age; but unto us it is
A cell of ignorance, traveling abed,
A prison for a debtor that not dares
To stride a limit.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  What should we speak of
When we are old as you? When we shall hear
The rain and wind beat dark December, how
In this our pinching cave shall we discourse
The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing.
We are beastly: subtle as the fox for prey,
Like warlike as the wolf for what we eat.
Our valor is to chase what flies. Our cage
We make a choir, as doth the prisoned bird,
And sing our bondage freely.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  How you speak!
Did you but know the city's usuries
And felt them knowingly; the art o' th' court,
As hard to leave as keep, whose top to climb
Is certain falling, or so slipp'ry that
The fear's as bad as falling; the toil o' th' war,
A pain that only seems to seek out danger
I' th' name of fame and honor, which dies i' th' search
And hath as oft a sland'rous epitaph
As record of fair act--nay, many times
Doth ill deserve by doing well; what's worse,
Must curtsy at the censure. O boys, this story
The world may read in me. My body's marked
With Roman swords, and my report was once
First with the best of note. Cymbeline loved me,
And when a soldier was the theme, my name
Was not far off. Then was I as a tree
Whose boughs did bend with fruit. But in one night
A storm or robbery, call it what you will,
Shook down my mellow hangings, nay, my leaves,
And left me bare to weather.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  Uncertain favor!

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]
My fault being nothing, as I have told you oft,
But that two villains, whose false oaths prevailed
Before my perfect honor, swore to Cymbeline
I was confederate with the Romans. So
Followed my banishment; and this twenty years
This rock and these demesnes have been my world,
Where I have lived at honest freedom, paid
More pious debts to heaven than in all
The fore-end of my time. But up to th' mountains!
This is not hunters' language. He that strikes
The venison first shall be the lord o' th' feast;
To him the other two shall minister,
And we will fear no poison, which attends
In place of greater state. I'll meet you in the valleys.
[Guiderius and Arviragus exit.]

BELARIUS
How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature!
These boys know little they are sons to th' King,
Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.
They think they are mine, and, though trained up
thus meanly,
I' th' cave wherein they bow, their thoughts do hit
The roofs of palaces, and nature prompts them
In simple and low things to prince it much
Beyond the trick of others. This Polydor,
The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who
The King his father called Guiderius--Jove!
When on my three-foot stool I sit and tell
The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out
Into my story; say "Thus mine enemy fell,
And thus I set my foot on 's neck," even then
The princely blood flows in his cheek, he sweats,
Strains his young nerves, and puts himself in posture
That acts my words. The younger brother, Cadwal,
Once Arviragus, in as like a figure
Strikes life into my speech and shows much more
His own conceiving. Hark, the game is roused!
O Cymbeline, heaven and my conscience knows
Thou didst unjustly banish me; whereon,
At three and two years old I stole these babes,
Thinking to bar thee of succession as
Thou refts me of my lands. Euriphile,
Thou wast their nurse; they took thee for their
mother,
And every day do honor to her grave.
Myself, Belarius, that am Morgan called,
They take for natural father. The game is up!
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Pisanio and Imogen.]


IMOGEN
Thou told'st me, when we came from horse, the place
Was near at hand. Ne'er longed my mother so
To see me first as I have now. Pisanio, man,
Where is Posthumus? What is in thy mind
That makes thee stare thus? Wherefore breaks that
sigh
From th' inward of thee? One but painted thus
Would be interpreted a thing perplexed
Beyond self-explication. Put thyself
Into a havior of less fear, ere wildness
Vanquish my staider senses. What's the matter?
[Pisanio hands her a paper.]
Why tender'st thou that paper to me with
A look untender? If 't be summer news,
Smile to 't before; if winterly, thou need'st
But keep that count'nance still. My husband's hand!
That drug-damned Italy hath out-craftied him,
And he's at some hard point. Speak, man! Thy tongue
May take off some extremity, which to read
Would be even mortal to me.

PISANIO  Please you read,
And you shall find me, wretched man, a thing
The most disdained of fortune.

IMOGEN [reads:]  Thy mistress, Pisanio, hath played the
strumpet in my bed, the testimonies whereof lies
bleeding in me. I speak not out of weak surmises but
from proof as strong as my grief and as certain as I
expect my revenge. That part thou, Pisanio, must act
for me, if thy faith be not tainted with the breach of
hers. Let thine own hands take away her life. I shall
give thee opportunity at Milford Haven--she hath
my letter for the purpose--where, if thou fear to
strike and to make me certain it is done, thou art the
pander to her dishonor and equally to me disloyal.

PISANIO, [aside]
What shall I need to draw my sword? The paper
Hath cut her throat already. No, 'tis slander,
Whose edge is sharper than the sword, whose tongue
Outvenoms all the worms of Nile, whose breath
Rides on the posting winds and doth belie
All corners of the world. Kings, queens, and states,
Maids, matrons, nay, the secrets of the grave
This viperous slander enters.--What cheer, madam?

IMOGEN
False to his bed? What is it to be false?
To lie in watch there and to think on him?
To weep 'twixt clock and clock? If sleep charge nature,
To break it with a fearful dream of him
And cry myself awake? That's false to 's bed, is it?

PISANIO  Alas, good lady!

IMOGEN
I false? Thy conscience witness! Iachimo,
Thou didst accuse him of incontinency.
Thou then looked'st like a villain. Now methinks
Thy favor's good enough. Some jay of Italy,
Whose mother was her painting, hath betrayed him.
Poor I am stale, a garment out of fashion,
And, for I am richer than to hang by th' walls,
I must be ripped. To pieces with me! O,
Men's vows are women's traitors! All good seeming,
By thy revolt, O husband, shall be thought
Put on for villainy, not born where 't grows,
But worn a bait for ladies.

PISANIO  Good madam, hear me.

IMOGEN
True honest men, being heard like false Aeneas,
Were in his time thought false, and Sinon's weeping
Did scandal many a holy tear, took pity
From most true wretchedness. So thou, Posthumus,
Wilt lay the leaven on all proper men;
Goodly and gallant shall be false and perjured
From thy great fail.--Come, fellow, be thou honest;
Do thou thy master's bidding. When thou seest him,
A little witness my obedience. Look,
I draw the sword myself.
[She draws Pisanio's sword from its
scabbard and hands it to him.]
Take it, and hit
The innocent mansion of my love, my heart.
Fear not; 'tis empty of all things but grief.
Thy master is not there, who was indeed
The riches of it. Do his bidding; strike.
Thou mayst be valiant in a better cause,
But now thou seem'st a coward.

PISANIO, [throwing down the sword]  Hence, vile
instrument!
Thou shalt not damn my hand.

IMOGEN  Why, I must die,
And if I do not by thy hand, thou art
No servant of thy master's. Against self-slaughter
There is a prohibition so divine
That cravens my weak hand. Come, here's my heart--
Something's afore 't. Soft, soft! We'll no defense--
Obedient as the scabbard. What is here?
[She takes papers from her bodice.]
The scriptures of the loyal Leonatus,
All turned to heresy? Away, away!
[She throws away the letters.]
Corrupters of my faith, you shall no more
Be stomachers to my heart. Thus may poor fools
Believe false teachers. Though those that are betrayed
Do feel the treason sharply, yet the traitor
Stands in worse case of woe. And thou, Posthumus,
That didst set up
My disobedience 'gainst the King my father
And make me put into contempt the suits
Of princely fellows, shalt hereafter find
It is no act of common passage, but
A strain of rareness: and I grieve myself
To think, when thou shalt be disedged by her
That now thou tirest on, how thy memory
Will then be panged by me.--Prithee, dispatch.
The lamb entreats the butcher. Where's thy knife?
Thou art too slow to do thy master's bidding
When I desire it too.

PISANIO  O gracious lady,
Since I received command to do this business
I have not slept one wink.

IMOGEN  Do 't, and to bed, then.

PISANIO
I'll wake mine eyeballs out first.

IMOGEN  Wherefore then
Didst undertake it? Why hast thou abused
So many miles with a pretense? This place?
Mine action and thine own? Our horses' labor?
The time inviting thee? The perturbed court
For my being absent, whereunto I never
Purpose return? Why hast thou gone so far
To be unbent when thou hast ta'en thy stand,
Th' elected deer before thee?

PISANIO  But to win time
To lose so bad employment, in the which
I have considered of a course. Good lady,
Hear me with patience.

IMOGEN  Talk thy tongue weary.
Speak.
I have heard I am a strumpet, and mine ear,
Therein false struck, can take no greater wound,
Nor tent to bottom that. But speak.

PISANIO  Then, madam,
I thought you would not back again.

IMOGEN  Most like,
Bringing me here to kill me.

PISANIO  Not so, neither.
But if I were as wise as honest, then
My purpose would prove well. It cannot be
But that my master is abused. Some villain,
Ay, and singular in his art, hath done
You both this cursed injury.

IMOGEN
Some Roman courtesan?

PISANIO  No, on my life.
I'll give but notice you are dead, and send him
Some bloody sign of it, for 'tis commanded
I should do so. You shall be missed at court,
And that will well confirm it.

IMOGEN  Why, good fellow,
What shall I do the while? Where bide? How live?
Or in my life what comfort when I am
Dead to my husband?

PISANIO  If you'll back to th' court--

IMOGEN
No court, no father, nor no more ado
With that harsh, noble, simple nothing,
That Cloten, whose love suit hath been to me
As fearful as a siege.

PISANIO  If not at court,
Then not in Britain must you bide.

IMOGEN  Where, then?
Hath Britain all the sun that shines? Day, night,
Are they not but in Britain? I' th' world's volume
Our Britain seems as of it, but not in 't,
In a great pool a swan's nest. Prithee think
There's livers out of Britain.

PISANIO  I am most glad
You think of other place. Th' ambassador,
Lucius the Roman, comes to Milford Haven
Tomorrow. Now, if you could wear a mind
Dark as your fortune is, and but disguise
That which t' appear itself must not yet be
But by self-danger, you should tread a course
Pretty and full of view: yea, haply near
The residence of Posthumus; so nigh, at least,
That though his actions were not visible, yet
Report should render him hourly to your ear
As truly as he moves.

IMOGEN  O, for such means,
Though peril to my modesty, not death on 't,
I would adventure.

PISANIO  Well then, here's the point:
You must forget to be a woman; change
Command into obedience, fear and niceness--
The handmaids of all women, or, more truly,
Woman it pretty self--into a waggish courage,
Ready in gibes, quick-answered, saucy, and
As quarrelous as the weasel. Nay, you must
Forget that rarest treasure of your cheek,
Exposing it--but O, the harder heart!
Alack, no remedy--to the greedy touch
Of common-kissing Titan, and forget
Your laborsome and dainty trims, wherein
You made great Juno angry.

IMOGEN  Nay, be brief.
I see into thy end and am almost
A man already.

PISANIO  First, make yourself but like one.
Forethinking this, I have already fit--
'Tis in my cloakbag--doublet, hat, hose, all
That answer to them. Would you, in their serving,
And with what imitation you can borrow
From youth of such a season, 'fore noble Lucius
Present yourself, desire his service, tell him
Wherein you're happy--which will make him know,
If that his head have ear in music--doubtless
With joy he will embrace you, for he's honorable
And, doubling that, most holy. Your means abroad:
You have me, rich, and I will never fail
Beginning nor supplyment.

IMOGEN, [taking the cloakbag]  Thou art all the comfort
The gods will diet me with. Prithee, away.
There's more to be considered, but we'll even
All that good time will give us. This attempt
I am soldier to, and will abide it with
A prince's courage. Away, I prithee.

PISANIO
Well, madam, we must take a short farewell,
Lest, being missed, I be suspected of
Your carriage from the court. My noble mistress,
Here is a box. I had it from the Queen.
[He hands her the box.]
What's in 't is precious. If you are sick at sea
Or stomach-qualmed at land, a dram of this
Will drive away distemper. To some shade,
And fit you to your manhood. May the gods
Direct you to the best.

IMOGEN  Amen. I thank thee.
[They exit.]

Scene 5
=======
[Enter Cymbeline, Queen, Cloten, Lucius, Lords, and
Attendants.]


CYMBELINE
Thus far, and so farewell.

LUCIUS  Thanks, royal sir.
My emperor hath wrote I must from hence,
And am right sorry that I must report you
My master's enemy.

CYMBELINE  Our subjects, sir,
Will not endure his yoke, and for ourself
To show less sovereignty than they must needs
Appear unkinglike.

LUCIUS  So, sir. I desire of you
A conduct overland to Milford Haven.--
Madam, all joy befall your Grace--and you.

CYMBELINE, [to Lords]
My lords, you are appointed for that office.
The due of honor in no point omit.--
So, farewell, noble Lucius.

LUCIUS, [to Cloten]  Your hand, my lord.

CLOTEN
Receive it friendly, but from this time forth
I wear it as your enemy.

LUCIUS  Sir, the event
Is yet to name the winner. Fare you well.

CYMBELINE
Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my lords,
Till he have crossed the Severn. Happiness!
[Exit Lucius and Lords.]

QUEEN
He goes hence frowning, but it honors us
That we have given him cause.

CLOTEN  'Tis all the better.
Your valiant Britons have their wishes in it.

CYMBELINE
Lucius hath wrote already to the Emperor
How it goes here. It fits us therefore ripely
Our chariots and our horsemen be in readiness.
The powers that he already hath in Gallia
Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves
His war for Britain.

QUEEN  'Tis not sleepy business,
But must be looked to speedily and strongly.

CYMBELINE
Our expectation that it would be thus
Hath made us forward. But, my gentle queen,
Where is our daughter? She hath not appeared
Before the Roman, nor to us hath tendered
The duty of the day. She looks us like
A thing more made of malice than of duty.
We have noted it.--Call her before us, for
We have been too slight in sufferance.
[An Attendant exits.]

QUEEN  Royal sir,
Since the exile of Posthumus, most retired
Hath her life been, the cure whereof, my lord,
'Tis time must do. Beseech your Majesty,
Forbear sharp speeches to her. She's a lady
So tender of rebukes that words are strokes
And strokes death to her.

[Enter Attendant.]


CYMBELINE  Where is she, sir? How
Can her contempt be answered?

ATTENDANT  Please you, sir,
Her chambers are all locked, and there's no answer
That will be given to th' loud'st noise we make.

QUEEN
My lord, when last I went to visit her,
She prayed me to excuse her keeping close;
Whereto constrained by her infirmity,
She should that duty leave unpaid to you
Which daily she was bound to proffer. This
She wished me to make known, but our great court
Made me to blame in memory.

CYMBELINE  Her doors locked?
Not seen of late? Grant, heavens, that which I
Fear prove false!	[He exits with Attendant.]

QUEEN  Son, I say, follow the King.

CLOTEN
That man of hers, Pisanio, her old servant
I have not seen these two days.

QUEEN  Go, look after.
[Cloten exits.]
[Aside.] Pisanio, thou that stand'st so for Posthumus--
He hath a drug of mine. I pray his absence
Proceed by swallowing that, for he believes
It is a thing most precious. But for her,
Where is she gone? Haply despair hath seized her,
Or, winged with fervor of her love, she's flown
To her desired Posthumus. Gone she is
To death or to dishonor, and my end
Can make good use of either. She being down,
I have the placing of the British crown.

[Enter Cloten.]

How now, my son?

CLOTEN  'Tis certain she is fled.
Go in and cheer the King. He rages; none
Dare come about him.

QUEEN, [aside]  All the better. May
This night forestall him of the coming day!
[Queen exits, with Attendants.]

CLOTEN
I love and hate her, for she's fair and royal,
And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite
Than lady, ladies, woman. From every one
The best she hath, and she, of all compounded,
Outsells them all. I love her therefore, but
Disdaining me and throwing favors on
The low Posthumus slanders so her judgment
That what's else rare is choked. And in that point
I will conclude to hate her, nay, indeed,
To be revenged upon her. For, when fools
Shall--

[Enter Pisanio.]

Who is here? What, are you packing, sirrah?
Come hither. Ah, you precious pander! Villain,
Where is thy lady? In a word, or else
Thou art straightway with the fiends.
[He draws his sword.]

PISANIO  O, good my lord--

CLOTEN
Where is thy lady? Or, by Jupiter--
I will not ask again. Close villain,
I'll have this secret from thy heart or rip
Thy heart to find it. Is she with Posthumus,
From whose so many weights of baseness cannot
A dram of worth be drawn?

PISANIO  Alas, my lord,
How can she be with him? When was she missed?
He is in Rome.

CLOTEN  Where is she, sir? Come nearer.
No farther halting. Satisfy me home
What is become of her.

PISANIO
O, my all-worthy lord!

CLOTEN  All-worthy villain!
Discover where thy mistress is at once,
At the next word. No more of "worthy lord"!
Speak, or thy silence on the instant is
Thy condemnation and thy death.

PISANIO  Then, sir,
This paper is the history of my knowledge
Touching her flight.	[He gives Cloten a paper.]

CLOTEN  Let's see 't. I will pursue her
Even to Augustus' throne.

PISANIO, [aside]  Or this or perish.
She's far enough, and what he learns by this
May prove his travail, not her danger.

CLOTEN  Humh!

PISANIO, [aside]
I'll write to my lord she's dead. O Imogen,
Safe mayst thou wander, safe return again!

CLOTEN  Sirrah, is this letter true?

PISANIO  Sir, as I think.

CLOTEN  It is Posthumus' hand, I know 't. Sirrah, if
thou wouldst not be a villain, but do me true service,
undergo those employments wherein I should
have cause to use thee with a serious industry--
that is, what villainy soe'er I bid thee do to perform
it directly and truly--I would think thee an honest
man. Thou shouldst neither want my means for thy
relief nor my voice for thy preferment.

PISANIO  Well, my good lord.

CLOTEN  Wilt thou serve me? For since patiently and
constantly thou hast stuck to the bare fortune of
that beggar Posthumus, thou canst not in the
course of gratitude but be a diligent follower of
mine. Wilt thou serve me?

PISANIO  Sir, I will.

CLOTEN  Give me thy hand. Here's my purse. [Gives
him money.] Hast any of thy late master's garments
in thy possession?

PISANIO  I have, my lord, at my lodging the same suit he
wore when he took leave of my lady and mistress.

CLOTEN  The first service thou dost me, fetch that suit
hither. Let it be thy first service. Go.

PISANIO  I shall, my lord.	[He exits.]

CLOTEN  Meet thee at Milford Haven!--I forgot to ask
him one thing; I'll remember 't anon. Even there,
thou villain Posthumus, will I kill thee. I would
these garments were come. She said upon a time--
the bitterness of it I now belch from my heart--
that she held the very garment of Posthumus in
more respect than my noble and natural person,
together with the adornment of my qualities. With
that suit upon my back will I ravish her. First, kill
him, and in her eyes. There shall she see my valor,
which will then be a torment to her contempt.
He on the ground, my speech of insultment
ended on his dead body, and when my lust hath
dined--which, as I say, to vex her I will execute
in the clothes that she so praised--to the court
I'll knock her back, foot her home again. She hath
despised me rejoicingly, and I'll be merry in my
revenge.

[Enter Pisanio with the clothes.]

Be those the garments?

PISANIO  Ay, my noble lord.

CLOTEN  How long is 't since she went to Milford Haven?

PISANIO  She can scarce be there yet.

CLOTEN  Bring this apparel to my chamber; that is the
second thing that I have commanded thee. The
third is that thou wilt be a voluntary mute to my
design. Be but duteous, and true preferment shall
tender itself to thee. My revenge is now at Milford.
Would I had wings to follow it! Come, and be true.
[He exits.]

PISANIO
Thou bidd'st me to my loss, for true to thee
Were to prove false, which I will never be,
To him that is most true. To Milford go,
And find not her whom thou pursuest. Flow, flow,
You heavenly blessings, on her. This fool's speed
Be crossed with slowness. Labor be his meed.
[He exits.]

Scene 6
=======
[Enter Imogen alone, dressed as a boy, Fidele.]


IMOGEN
I see a man's life is a tedious one.
I have tired myself, and for two nights together
Have made the ground my bed. I should be sick
But that my resolution helps me. Milford,
When from the mountain top Pisanio showed thee,
Thou wast within a ken. O Jove, I think
Foundations fly the wretched--such, I mean,
Where they should be relieved. Two beggars told me
I could not miss my way. Will poor folks lie,
That have afflictions on them, knowing 'tis
A punishment or trial? Yes. No wonder,
When rich ones scarce tell true. To lapse in fullness
Is sorer than to lie for need, and falsehood
Is worse in kings than beggars. My dear lord,
Thou art one o' th' false ones. Now I think on thee,
My hunger's gone; but even before, I was
At point to sink for food. But what is this?
Here is a path to 't. 'Tis some savage hold.
I were best not call; I dare not call. Yet famine,
Ere clean it o'erthrow nature, makes it valiant.
Plenty and peace breeds cowards; hardness ever
Of hardiness is mother.--Ho! Who's here?
If anything that's civil, speak; if savage,
Take or lend. Ho!--No answer? Then I'll enter.
Best draw my sword; an if mine enemy
But fear the sword like me, he'll scarcely look on 't.
[She draws her sword.]
Such a foe, good heavens!
[She exits, as into the cave.]

[Enter Belarius as Morgan, Guiderius as Polydor, and
Arviragus as Cadwal.]


BELARIUS, [as Morgan]
You, Polydor, have proved best woodman and
Are master of the feast. Cadwal and I
Will play the cook and servant; 'tis our match.
The sweat of industry would dry and die
But for the end it works to. Come, our stomachs
Will make what's homely savory. Weariness
Can snore upon the flint when resty sloth
Finds the down pillow hard. Now peace be here,
Poor house, that keep'st thyself.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  I am throughly weary.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]
I am weak with toil, yet strong in appetite.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
There is cold meat i' th' cave. We'll browse on that
Whilst what we have killed be cooked.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan, looking into the cave]
Stay, come
not in!
But that it eats our victuals, I should think
Here were a fairy.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  What's the matter, sir?

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]
By Jupiter, an angel! Or, if not,
An earthly paragon. Behold divineness
No elder than a boy.

[Enter Imogen as Fidele.]


IMOGEN, [as Fidele]  Good masters, harm me not.
Before I entered here, I called, and thought
To have begged or bought what I have took. Good
troth,
I have stol'n naught, nor would not, though I had
found
Gold strewed i' th' floor. Here's money for my meat.
[She offers money.]
I would have left it on the board so soon
As I had made my meal, and parted
With prayers for the provider.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  Money, youth?

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]
All gold and silver rather turn to dirt,
As 'tis no better reckoned but of those
Who worship dirty gods.

IMOGEN, [as Fidele]  I see you're angry.
Know, if you kill me for my fault, I should
Have died had I not made it.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  Whither bound?

IMOGEN, [as Fidele]  To Milford Haven.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  What's your name?

IMOGEN, [as Fidele]
Fidele, sir. I have a kinsman who
Is bound for Italy. He embarked at Milford,
To whom being going, almost spent with hunger,
I am fall'n in this offense.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  Prithee, fair youth,
Think us no churls, nor measure our good minds
By this rude place we live in. Well encountered!
'Tis almost night; you shall have better cheer
Ere you depart, and thanks to stay and eat it.--
Boys, bid him welcome.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  Were you a woman, youth,
I should woo hard but be your groom in honesty,
Ay, bid for you as I do buy.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  I'll make 't my comfort
He is a man. I'll love him as my brother.--
And such a welcome as I'd give to him
After long absence, such is yours. Most welcome.
Be sprightly, for you fall 'mongst friends.

IMOGEN, [as Fidele]  'Mongst
friends?
If brothers--[(aside)] Would it had been so, that they
Had been my father's sons! Then had my prize
Been less, and so more equal ballasting
To thee, Posthumus.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  He wrings at some distress.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
Would I could free 't!

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  Or I, whate'er it be,
What pain it cost, what danger. Gods!

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  Hark, boys.
[They talk aside.]

IMOGEN  Great men
That had a court no bigger than this cave,
That did attend themselves and had the virtue
Which their own conscience sealed them, laying by
That nothing-gift of differing multitudes,
Could not outpeer these twain. Pardon me, gods!
I'd change my sex to be companion with them,
Since Leonatus false.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  It shall be so.
Boys, we'll go dress our hunt.--Fair youth, come in.
Discourse is heavy, fasting. When we have supped,
We'll mannerly demand thee of thy story
So far as thou wilt speak it.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  Pray, draw near.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]
The night to th' owl and morn to th' lark less
welcome.

IMOGEN, [as Fidele]  Thanks, sir.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  I pray, draw near.
[They exit.]

Scene 7
=======
[Enter two Roman Senators, and Tribunes.]


FIRST SENATOR
This is the tenor of the Emperor's writ:
That since the common men are now in action
'Gainst the Pannonians and Dalmatians,
And that the legions now in Gallia are
Full weak to undertake our wars against
The fall'n-off Britons, that we do incite
The gentry to this business. He creates
Lucius proconsul; and to you the tribunes
For this immediate levy, he commends
His absolute commission. Long live Caesar!

TRIBUNE
Is Lucius general of the forces?

SECOND SENATOR  Ay.

TRIBUNE
Remaining now in Gallia?

FIRST SENATOR  With those legions
Which I have spoke of, whereunto your levy
Must be supplyant. The words of your commission
Will tie you to the numbers and the time
Of their dispatch.

TRIBUNE  We will discharge our duty.
[They exit.]


ACT 4
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Cloten alone, dressed in Posthumus's garments.]


CLOTEN  I am near to th' place where they should meet,
if Pisanio have mapped it truly. How fit his garments
serve me! Why should his mistress, who
was made by him that made the tailor, not be fit
too? The rather, saving reverence of the word, for
'tis said a woman's fitness comes by fits. Therein I
must play the workman. I dare speak it to myself,
for it is not vainglory for a man and his glass to
confer in his own chamber. I mean, the lines of my
body are as well drawn as his, no less young, more
strong; not beneath him in fortunes, beyond him
in the advantage of the time, above him in birth,
alike conversant in general services, and more remarkable
in single oppositions. Yet this imperceiverant
thing loves him in my despite. What
mortality is! Posthumus, thy head, which now is
growing upon thy shoulders, shall within this hour
be off, thy mistress enforced, thy garments cut to
pieces before thy face; and all this done, spurn her
home to her father, who may haply be a little angry
or my so rough usage. But my mother, having
power of his testiness, shall turn all into my commendations.
My horse is tied up safe. Out, sword,
and to a sore purpose. Fortune, put them into my
hand! This is the very description of their meeting
place, and the fellow dares not deceive me.
[He draws his sword and exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Belarius as Morgan, Guiderius as Polydor,
Arviragus as Cadwal, and Imogen as Fidele, from the
cave.]


BELARIUS, [as Morgan, to Fidele]
You are not well. Remain here in the cave.
We'll come to you after hunting.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal, to Fidele]  Brother, stay here.
Are we not brothers?

IMOGEN, [as Fidele]  So man and man should be,
But clay and clay differs in dignity,
Whose dust is both alike. I am very sick.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor, to Morgan and Cadwal]
Go you to hunting. I'll abide with him.

IMOGEN, [as Fidele]
So sick I am not, yet I am not well;
But not so citizen a wanton as
To seem to die ere sick. So please you, leave me.
Stick to your journal course. The breach of custom
Is breach of all. I am ill, but your being by me
Cannot amend me. Society is no comfort
To one not sociable. I am not very sick,
Since I can reason of it. Pray you trust me here--
I'll rob none but myself--and let me die,
Stealing so poorly.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
I love thee--I have spoke it--
How much the quantity, the weight as much
As I do love my father.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  What? How, how?

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]
If it be sin to say so, sir, I yoke me
In my good brother's fault. I know not why
I love this youth, and I have heard you say
Love's reason's without reason. The bier at door,
And a demand who is 't shall die, I'd say
"My father, not this youth."

BELARIUS, [aside]  O, noble strain!
O, worthiness of nature, breed of greatness!
Cowards father cowards and base things sire base;
Nature hath meal and bran, contempt and grace.
I'm not their father, yet who this should be
Doth miracle itself, loved before me.--
'Tis the ninth hour o' th' morn.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal, to Fidele]  Brother, farewell.

IMOGEN, [as Fidele]
I wish you sport.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  You health.--So please you, sir.

IMOGEN, [aside]
These are kind creatures. Gods, what lies I have heard!
Our courtiers say all's savage but at court;
Experience, O, thou disprov'st report!
Th' imperious seas breeds monsters; for the dish
Poor tributary rivers as sweet fish.
I am sick still, heart-sick. Pisanio,
I'll now taste of thy drug.	[She swallows the drug.]

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor, to Morgan and Cadwal]
I could not stir him.
He said he was gentle but unfortunate,
Dishonestly afflicted but yet honest.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]
Thus did he answer me, yet said hereafter
I might know more.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  To th' field, to th' field!
[To Fidele.] We'll leave you for this time. Go in and
rest.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]
We'll not be long away.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  Pray, be not sick,
For you must be our huswife.

IMOGEN, [as Fidele]  Well or ill,
I am bound to you.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  And shalt be ever.
[Imogen exits as into the cave.]
This youth, howe'er distressed, appears he hath had
Good ancestors.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  How angel-like he sings!

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
But his neat cookery! He cut our roots in characters
And sauced our broths as Juno had been sick
And he her dieter.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  Nobly he yokes
A smiling with a sigh, as if the sigh
Was that it was for not being such a smile,
The smile mocking the sigh that it would fly
From so divine a temple to commix
With winds that sailors rail at.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  I do note
That grief and patience, rooted in them both,
Mingle their spurs together.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  Grow, patience,
And let the stinking elder, grief, untwine
His perishing root with the increasing vine!

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]
It is great morning. Come, away. Who's there?

[Enter Cloten.]


CLOTEN, [to himself]
I cannot find those runagates. That villain
Hath mocked me. I am faint.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan, to Polydor and Cadwal]
"Those runagates"?
Means he not us? I partly know him. 'Tis
Cloten, the son o' th' Queen. I fear some ambush.
I saw him not these many years, and yet
I know 'tis he. We are held as outlaws. Hence.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
He is but one. You and my brother search
What companies are near. Pray you, away.
Let me alone with him.	[Belarius and Arviragus exit.]

CLOTEN  Soft, what are you
That fly me thus? Some villain mountaineers?
I have heard of such.--What slave art thou?

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  A thing
More slavish did I ne'er than answering
A slave without a knock.

CLOTEN  Thou art a robber,
A lawbreaker, a villain. Yield thee, thief.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
To who? To thee? What art thou? Have not I
An arm as big as thine? A heart as big?
Thy words, I grant, are bigger, for I wear not
My dagger in my mouth. Say what thou art,
Why I should yield to thee.

CLOTEN  Thou villain base,
Know'st me not by my clothes?

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  No, nor thy tailor,
rascal.
Who is thy grandfather? He made those clothes,
Which, as it seems, make thee.

CLOTEN  Thou precious varlet,
My tailor made them not.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  Hence then, and thank
The man that gave them thee. Thou art some fool.
I am loath to beat thee.

CLOTEN  Thou injurious thief,
Hear but my name, and tremble.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  What's thy name?

CLOTEN  Cloten, thou villain.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
Cloten, thou double villain, be thy name,
I cannot tremble at it. Were it Toad, or Adder, Spider,
'Twould move me sooner.

CLOTEN  To thy further fear,
Nay, to thy mere confusion, thou shalt know
I am son to th' Queen.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  I am sorry for 't, not seeming
So worthy as thy birth.

CLOTEN  Art not afeard?

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
Those that I reverence, those I fear--the wise;
At fools I laugh, not fear them.

CLOTEN  Die the death!
When I have slain thee with my proper hand,
I'll follow those that even now fled hence
And on the gates of Lud's Town set your heads.
Yield, rustic mountaineer!
[They fight and exit.]

[Enter Belarius as Morgan and Arviragus as
Cadwal.]


BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  No company's abroad?

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]
None in the world. You did mistake him sure.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]
I cannot tell. Long is it since I saw him,
But time hath nothing blurred those lines of favor
Which then he wore. The snatches in his voice
And burst of speaking were as his. I am absolute
'Twas very Cloten.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  In this place we left them.
I wish my brother make good time with him,
You say he is so fell.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  Being scarce made up,
I mean to man, he had not apprehension
Of roaring terrors; for defect of judgment
Is oft the cause of fear.

[Enter Guiderius as Polydor, carrying Cloten's head.]

But see, thy brother.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
This Cloten was a fool, an empty purse;
There was no money in 't. Not Hercules
Could have knocked out his brains, for he had none.
Yet I not doing this, the fool had borne
My head as I do his.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  What hast thou done?

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
I am perfect what: cut off one Cloten's head,
Son to the Queen, after his own report,
Who called me traitor mountaineer, and swore
With his own single hand he'd take us in,
Displace our heads where, thank the gods, they
grow,
And set them on Lud's Town.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  We are all undone.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
Why, worthy father, what have we to lose
But that he swore to take, our lives? The law
Protects not us. Then why should we be tender
To let an arrogant piece of flesh threat us,
Play judge and executioner all himself,
For we do fear the law? What company
Discover you abroad?

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  No single soul
Can we set eye on, but in all safe reason
He must have some attendants. Though his humor
Was nothing but mutation--ay, and that
From one bad thing to worse--not frenzy,
Not absolute madness could so far have raved
To bring him here alone. Although perhaps
It may be heard at court that such as we
Cave here, hunt here, are outlaws, and in time
May make some stronger head, the which he
hearing--
As it is like him--might break out and swear
He'd fetch us in, yet is 't not probable
To come alone, either he so undertaking
Or they so suffering. Then on good ground we fear,
If we do fear this body hath a tail
More perilous than the head.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  Let ord'nance
Come as the gods foresay it. Howsoe'er,
My brother hath done well.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  I had no mind
To hunt this day. The boy Fidele's sickness
Did make my way long forth.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  With his own sword,
Which he did wave against my throat, I have ta'en
His head from him. I'll throw 't into the creek
Behind our rock, and let it to the sea
And tell the fishes he's the Queen's son, Cloten.
That's all I reck.	[He exits.]

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  I fear 'twill be revenged.
Would, Polydor, thou hadst not done 't, though valor
Becomes thee well enough.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  Would I had done 't,
So the revenge alone pursued me. Polydor,
I love thee brotherly, but envy much
Thou hast robbed me of this deed. I would revenges
That possible strength might meet would seek us
through
And put us to our answer.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  Well, 'tis done.
We'll hunt no more today, nor seek for danger
Where there's no profit. I prithee, to our rock.
You and Fidele play the cooks. I'll stay
Till hasty Polydor return, and bring him
To dinner presently.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  Poor sick Fidele.
I'll willingly to him. To gain his color
I'd let a parish of such Clotens blood,
And praise myself for charity.	[He exits.]

BELARIUS  O thou goddess,
Thou divine Nature, thou thyself thou blazon'st
In these two princely boys! They are as gentle
As zephyrs blowing below the violet,
Not wagging his sweet head; and yet as rough,
Their royal blood enchafed, as the rud'st wind
That by the top doth take the mountain pine
And make him stoop to th' vale. 'Tis wonder
That an invisible instinct should frame them
To royalty unlearned, honor untaught,
Civility not seen from other, valor
That wildly grows in them but yields a crop
As if it had been sowed. Yet still it's strange
What Cloten's being here to us portends,
Or what his death will bring us.

[Enter Guiderius as Polydor.]


GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  Where's my brother?
I have sent Cloten's clotpole down the stream
In embassy to his mother. His body's hostage
For his return.	[Solemn music.]

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  My ingenious instrument!
Hark, Polydor, it sounds! But what occasion
Hath Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
Is he at home?

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  He went hence even now.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
What does he mean? Since death of my dear'st
mother
It did not speak before. All solemn things
Should answer solemn accidents. The matter?
Triumphs for nothing and lamenting toys
Is jollity for apes and grief for boys.
Is Cadwal mad?

[Enter Arviragus as Cadwal, with Imogen as dead,
bearing her in his arms.]


BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  Look, here he comes,
And brings the dire occasion in his arms
Of what we blame him for.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  The bird is dead
That we have made so much on. I had rather
Have skipped from sixteen years of age to sixty,
To have turned my leaping time into a crutch,
Than have seen this.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  O sweetest, fairest lily!
My brother wears thee not the one half so well
As when thou grew'st thyself.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  O melancholy,
Whoever yet could sound thy bottom, find
The ooze, to show what coast thy sluggish crare
Might eas'liest harbor in?--Thou blessed thing,
Jove knows what man thou mightst have made; but I,
Thou died'st, a most rare boy, of melancholy.--
How found you him?

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  Stark, as you see;
Thus smiling, as some fly had tickled slumber,
Not as Death's dart being laughed at; his right cheek
Reposing on a cushion.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  Where?

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  O' th' floor,
His arms thus leagued. I thought he slept, and put
My clouted brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness
Answered my steps too loud.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  Why, he but sleeps.
If he be gone, he'll make his grave a bed;
With female fairies will his tomb be haunted--
And worms will not come to thee.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  With fairest flowers,
Whilst summer lasts and I live here, Fidele,
I'll sweeten thy sad grave. Thou shalt not lack
The flower that's like thy face, pale primrose; nor
The azured harebell, like thy veins; no, nor
The leaf of eglantine whom, not to slander,
Out-sweetened not thy breath. The ruddock would
With charitable bill--O bill, sore shaming
Those rich-left heirs that let their fathers lie
Without a monument--bring thee all this,
Yea, and furred moss besides, when flowers are none
To winter-ground thy corse.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  Prithee, have done,
And do not play in wench-like words with that
Which is so serious. Let us bury him
And not protract with admiration what
Is now due debt. To th' grave.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  Say, where shall 's lay
him?

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
By good Euriphile, our mother.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  Be 't so.
And let us, Polydor, though now our voices
Have got the mannish crack, sing him to th' ground
As once to our mother; use like note and words,
Save that "Euriphile" must be "Fidele."

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  Cadwal,
I cannot sing. I'll weep, and word it with thee,
For notes of sorrow, out of tune, are worse
Than priests and fanes that lie.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  We'll speak it then.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]
Great griefs, I see, med'cine the less, for Cloten
Is quite forgot. He was a queen's son, boys,
And though he came our enemy, remember
He was paid for that. Though mean and mighty,
Rotting together, have one dust, yet reverence,
That angel of the world, doth make distinction
Of place 'tween high and low. Our foe was princely,
And though you took his life as being our foe,
Yet bury him as a prince.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor, to Morgan]  Pray you fetch him
hither.
Thersites' body is as good as Ajax'
When neither are alive.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal, to Morgan]  If you'll go fetch
him,
We'll say our song the whilst.--Brother, begin.
[Belarius exits.]

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
Nay, Cadwal, we must lay his head to th' east;
My father hath a reason for 't.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  'Tis true.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
Come on then, and remove him.
[They move Imogen's body.]

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  So, begin.

Song.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
	Fear no more the heat o' th' sun,
	   Nor the furious winter's rages;
	Thou thy worldly task hast done,
	   Home art gone and ta'en thy wages.
	Golden lads and girls all must,
	As chimney-sweepers, come to dust.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]
	Fear no more the frown o' th' great;
	   Thou art past the tyrant's stroke.
	Care no more to clothe and eat;
	   To thee the reed is as the oak.
	The scepter, learning, physic must
	All follow this and come to dust.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
	Fear no more the lightning flash.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]
	   Nor th' all-dreaded thunderstone.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
	Fear not slander, censure rash;

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]
	   Thou hast finished joy and moan.

BOTH	All lovers young, all lovers must
	Consign to thee and come to dust.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
	No exorciser harm thee,

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]
	Nor no witchcraft charm thee.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
	Ghost unlaid forbear thee.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]
	Nothing ill come near thee.

BOTH	Quiet consummation have,
	And renowned be thy grave.

[Enter Belarius as Morgan, with the body of Cloten.]


GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
We have done our obsequies. Come, lay him down.
[Cloten's body is placed by Imogen's.]

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]
Here's a few flowers, but 'bout midnight more.
The herbs that have on them cold dew o' th' night
Are strewings fitt'st for graves. Upon their faces.--
You were as flowers, now withered. Even so
These herblets shall, which we upon you strew.--
Come on, away; apart upon our knees.
The ground that gave them first has them again.
Their pleasures here are past; so is their pain.
[They exit.]

[Imogen awakes.]



IMOGEN
Yes, sir, to Milford Haven. Which is the way?
I thank you. By yond bush? Pray, how far thither?
Ods pittikins, can it be six mile yet?
I have gone all night. Faith, I'll lie down and sleep.
[She sees Cloten's headless body.]
But soft! No bedfellow? O gods and goddesses!
These flowers are like the pleasures of the world,
This bloody man the care on 't. I hope I dream,
For so I thought I was a cave-keeper
And cook to honest creatures. But 'tis not so.
'Twas but a bolt of nothing, shot at nothing,
Which the brain makes of fumes. Our very eyes
Are sometimes like our judgments, blind. Good faith,
I tremble still with fear; but if there be
Yet left in heaven as small a drop of pity
As a wren's eye, feared gods, a part of it!
The dream's here still. Even when I wake it is
Without me as within me, not imagined, felt.
A headless man? The garments of Posthumus?
I know the shape of 's leg. This is his hand,
His foot Mercurial, his Martial thigh,
The brawns of Hercules; but his Jovial face--
Murder in heaven! How? 'Tis gone. Pisanio,
All curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks,
And mine to boot, be darted on thee! Thou,
Conspired with that irregulous devil Cloten,
Hath here cut off my lord. To write and read
Be henceforth treacherous. Damned Pisanio
Hath with his forged letters--damned Pisanio--
From this most bravest vessel of the world
Struck the maintop. O Posthumus, alas,
Where is thy head? Where's that? Ay me, where's that?
Pisanio might have killed thee at the heart
And left this head on. How should this be? Pisanio?
'Tis he and Cloten. Malice and lucre in them
Have laid this woe here. O, 'tis pregnant, pregnant!
The drug he gave me, which he said was precious
And cordial to me, have I not found it
Murd'rous to th' senses? That confirms it home.
This is Pisanio's deed, and Cloten. O,
Give color to my pale cheek with thy blood,
That we the horrider may seem to those
Which chance to find us. O my lord! My lord!

[Enter Lucius, Captains, Soldiers, and a Soothsayer.]


CAPTAIN
To them the legions garrisoned in Gallia,
After your will, have crossed the sea, attending
You here at Milford Haven with your ships.
They are here in readiness.

LUCIUS  But what from Rome?

CAPTAIN
The Senate hath stirred up the confiners
And gentlemen of Italy, most willing spirits
That promise noble service, and they come
Under the conduct of bold Iachimo,
Siena's brother.

LUCIUS  When expect you them?

CAPTAIN
With the next benefit o' th' wind.

LUCIUS  This forwardness
Makes our hopes fair. Command our present numbers
Be mustered; bid the Captains look to 't.--Now, sir,
What have you dreamed of late of this war's purpose?

SOOTHSAYER
Last night the very gods showed me a vision--
I fast and prayed for their intelligence--thus:
I saw Jove's bird, the Roman eagle, winged
From the spongy south to this part of the west,
There vanished in the sunbeams, which portends--
Unless my sins abuse my divination--
Success to th' Roman host.

LUCIUS  Dream often so,
And never false.--Soft, ho, what trunk is here
Without his top? The ruin speaks that sometime
It was a worthy building. How, a page?
Or dead or sleeping on him? But dead rather,
For nature doth abhor to make his bed
With the defunct or sleep upon the dead.
Let's see the boy's face.

CAPTAIN  He's alive, my lord.

LUCIUS
He'll then instruct us of this body.--Young one,
Inform us of thy fortunes, for it seems
They crave to be demanded. Who is this
Thou mak'st thy bloody pillow? Or who was he
That, otherwise than noble nature did,
Hath altered that good picture? What's thy interest
In this sad wrack? How came 't? Who is 't?
What art thou?

IMOGEN, [as Fidele]  I am nothing; or if not,
Nothing to be were better. This was my master,
A very valiant Briton, and a good,
That here by mountaineers lies slain. Alas,
There is no more such masters. I may wander
From east to occident, cry out for service,
Try many, all good, serve truly, never
Find such another master.


LUCIUS  'Lack, good youth,
Thou mov'st no less with thy complaining than
Thy master in bleeding. Say his name, good friend.

IMOGEN, [as Fidele]
Richard du Champ. [Aside.] If I do lie and do
No harm by it, though the gods hear, I hope
They'll pardon it.--Say you, sir?

LUCIUS  Thy name?

IMOGEN, [as Fidele]  Fidele, sir.

LUCIUS
Thou dost approve thyself the very same;
Thy name well fits thy faith, thy faith thy name.
Wilt take thy chance with me? I will not say
Thou shalt be so well mastered, but be sure
No less beloved. The Roman Emperor's letters
Sent by a consul to me should not sooner
Than thine own worth prefer thee. Go with me.

IMOGEN, [as Fidele]
I'll follow, sir. But first, an 't please the gods,
I'll hide my master from the flies as deep
As these poor pickaxes can dig; and when
With wild-wood leaves and weeds I ha' strewed his
grave
And on it said a century of prayers,
Such as I can, twice o'er, I'll weep and sigh,
And leaving so his service, follow you,
So please you entertain me.

LUCIUS  Ay, good youth,
And rather father thee than master thee.--My friends,
The boy hath taught us manly duties. Let us
Find out the prettiest daisied plot we can,
And make him with our pikes and partisans
A grave. Come, arm him.--Boy, he's preferred
By thee to us, and he shall be interred
As soldiers can. Be cheerful; wipe thine eyes.
Some falls are means the happier to arise.
[They exit, the Soldiers carrying Cloten's body.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Cymbeline, Lords, Pisanio, and Attendants.]


CYMBELINE
Again, and bring me word how 'tis with her.
[An Attendant exits.]
A fever, with the absence of her son;
A madness, of which her life's in danger. Heavens,
How deeply you at once do touch me! Imogen,
The great part of my comfort, gone; my queen
Upon a desperate bed, and in a time
When fearful wars point at me; her son gone,
So needful for this present. It strikes me past
The hope of comfort.--But for thee, fellow,
Who needs must know of her departure and
Dost seem so ignorant, we'll enforce it from thee
By a sharp torture.

PISANIO  Sir, my life is yours.
I humbly set it at your will. But for my mistress,
I nothing know where she remains, why gone,
Nor when she purposes return. Beseech your
Highness,
Hold me your loyal servant.

LORD  Good my liege,
The day that she was missing, he was here.
I dare be bound he's true and shall perform
All parts of his subjection loyally. For Cloten,
There wants no diligence in seeking him,
And will no doubt be found.

CYMBELINE  The time is troublesome.
[To Pisanio.] We'll slip you for a season, but our jealousy
Does yet depend.

LORD  So please your Majesty,
The Roman legions, all from Gallia drawn,
Are landed on your coast with a supply
Of Roman gentlemen by the Senate sent.

CYMBELINE
Now for the counsel of my son and queen!
I am amazed with matter.

LORD  Good my liege,
Your preparation can affront no less
Than what you hear of. Come more, for more you're
ready.
The want is but to put those powers in motion
That long to move.

CYMBELINE  I thank you. Let's withdraw,
And meet the time as it seeks us. We fear not
What can from Italy annoy us, but
We grieve at chances here. Away.
[They exit. Pisanio remains.]

PISANIO
I heard no letter from my master since
I wrote him Imogen was slain. 'Tis strange.
Nor hear I from my mistress, who did promise
To yield me often tidings. Neither know I
What is betid to Cloten, but remain
Perplexed in all. The heavens still must work.
Wherein I am false I am honest; not true, to be true.
These present wars shall find I love my country,
Even to the note o' th' King, or I'll fall in them.
All other doubts, by time let them be cleared.
Fortune brings in some boats that are not steered.
[He exits.]

Scene 4
=======
[Enter Belarius as Morgan, Guiderius as Polydor,
and Arviragus as Cadwal.]


GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]
The noise is round about us.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  Let us from it.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]
What pleasure, sir, find we in life, to lock it
From action and adventure?

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  Nay, what hope
Have we in hiding us? This way the Romans
Must or for Britons slay us or receive us
For barbarous and unnatural revolts
During their use, and slay us after.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  Sons,
We'll higher to the mountains, there secure us.
To the King's party there's no going. Newness
Of Cloten's death--we being not known, not mustered
Among the bands--may drive us to a render
Where we have lived, and so extort from 's that
Which we have done, whose answer would be death
Drawn on with torture.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  This is, sir, a doubt
In such a time nothing becoming you
Nor satisfying us.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  It is not likely
That when they hear the Roman horses neigh,
Behold their quartered fires, have both their eyes
And ears so cloyed importantly as now,
That they will waste their time upon our note,
To know from whence we are.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]  O, I am known
Of many in the army. Many years,
Though Cloten then but young, you see not wore him
From my remembrance. And besides, the King
Hath not deserved my service nor your loves,
Who find in my exile the want of breeding,
The certainty of this hard life, aye hopeless
To have the courtesy your cradle promised,
But to be still hot summer's tanlings and
The shrinking slaves of winter.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  Than be so
Better to cease to be. Pray, sir, to th' army.
I and my brother are not known; yourself
So out of thought, and thereto so o'ergrown,
Cannot be questioned.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  By this sun that shines,
I'll thither. What thing is 't that I never
Did see man die, scarce ever looked on blood
But that of coward hares, hot goats, and venison!
Never bestrid a horse save one that had
A rider like myself, who ne'er wore rowel
Nor iron on his heel! I am ashamed
To look upon the holy sun, to have
The benefit of his blest beams, remaining
So long a poor unknown.

GUIDERIUS, [as Polydor]  By heavens, I'll go!
If you will bless me, sir, and give me leave,
I'll take the better care, but if you will not,
The hazard therefore due fall on me by
The hands of Romans.

ARVIRAGUS, [as Cadwal]  So say I. Amen.

BELARIUS, [as Morgan]
No reason I--since of your lives you set
So slight a valuation--should reserve
My cracked one to more care. Have with you, boys!
If in your country wars you chance to die,
That is my bed, too, lads, and there I'll lie.
Lead, lead. [Aside.] The time seems long; their
blood thinks scorn
Till it fly out and show them princes born.
[They exit.]


ACT 5
=====

Scene 1
=======
[Enter Posthumus alone, wearing Roman garments and
carrying a bloody cloth.]


POSTHUMUS
Yea, bloody cloth, I'll keep thee, for I wished
Thou shouldst be colored thus. You married ones,
If each of you should take this course, how many
Must murder wives much better than themselves
For wrying but a little! O Pisanio,
Every good servant does not all commands;
No bond but to do just ones. Gods, if you
Should have ta'en vengeance on my faults, I never
Had lived to put on this; so had you saved
The noble Imogen to repent, and struck
Me, wretch more worth your vengeance. But, alack,
You snatch some hence for little faults; that's love,
To have them fall no more; you some permit
To second ills with ills, each elder worse,
And make them dread it, to the doers' thrift.
But Imogen is your own. Do your best wills,
And make me blest to obey. I am brought hither
Among th' Italian gentry, and to fight
Against my lady's kingdom. 'Tis enough
That, Britain, I have killed thy mistress. Peace,
I'll give no wound to thee. Therefore, good heavens,
Hear patiently my purpose. I'll disrobe me
Of these Italian weeds and suit myself
As does a Briton peasant. So I'll fight
Against the part I come with; so I'll die
For thee, O Imogen, even for whom my life
Is every breath a death. And thus, unknown,
Pitied nor hated, to the face of peril
Myself I'll dedicate. Let me make men know
More valor in me than my habits show.
Gods, put the strength o' th' Leonati in me.
To shame the guise o' th' world, I will begin
The fashion: less without and more within.
[He exits.]

Scene 2
=======
[Enter Lucius, Iachimo, and the Roman army at one
door, and the Briton army at another, Leonatus Posthumus
following like a poor soldier. They march over and
go out. Then enter again, in skirmish, Iachimo and
Posthumus. He vanquisheth and disarmeth Iachimo,
and then leaves him.]


IACHIMO
The heaviness and guilt within my bosom
Takes off my manhood. I have belied a lady,
The Princess of this country, and the air on 't
Revengingly enfeebles me; or could this carl,
A very drudge of nature's, have subdued me
In my profession? Knighthoods and honors, borne
As I wear mine, are titles but of scorn.
If that thy gentry, Britain, go before
This lout as he exceeds our lords, the odds
Is that we scarce are men and you are gods.
[He exits.]

[The battle continues. The Britons fly; Cymbeline is
taken. Then enter, to his rescue, Belarius as Morgan,
Guiderius as Polydor, and Arviragus as Cadwal.]


BELARIUS, [as Morgan]
Stand, stand! We have th' advantage of the ground.
The lane is guarded. Nothing routs us but
The villainy of our fears.

GUIDERIUS, as Polydor, and ARVIRAGUS, as Cadwal  Stand, stand, and fight!

[Enter Posthumus, and seconds the Britons. They rescue
Cymbeline and exit. Then enter Lucius, Iachimo, and
Imogen as Fidele.]


LUCIUS, [to Fidele]
Away, boy, from the troops, and save thyself,
For friends kill friends, and the disorder's such
As war were hoodwinked.

IACHIMO  'Tis their fresh supplies.

LUCIUS
It is a day turned strangely. Or betimes
Let's reinforce, or fly.
[They exit.]

Scene 3
=======
[Enter Posthumus and a Briton Lord.]


LORD
Cam'st thou from where they made the stand?

POSTHUMUS  I did,
Though you, it seems, come from the fliers.

LORD  Ay.

POSTHUMUS
No blame be to you, sir, for all was lost,
But that the heavens fought. The King himself
Of his wings destitute, the army broken,
And but the backs of Britons seen, all flying
Through a strait lane; the enemy full-hearted,
Lolling the tongue with slaught'ring, having work
More plentiful than tools to do 't, struck down
Some mortally, some slightly touched, some falling
Merely through fear, that the strait pass was dammed
With dead men hurt behind and cowards living
To die with lengthened shame.

LORD  Where was this lane?

POSTHUMUS
Close by the battle, ditched, and walled with turf;
Which gave advantage to an ancient soldier,
An honest one, I warrant, who deserved
So long a breeding as his white beard came to,
In doing this for 's country. Athwart the lane,
He with two striplings--lads more like to run
The country base than to commit such slaughter,
With faces fit for masks, or rather fairer
Than those for preservation cased or shame--
Made good the passage, cried to those that fled
"Our Britain's harts die flying, not our men.
To darkness fleet souls that fly backwards. Stand,
Or we are Romans and will give you that
Like beasts which you shun beastly, and may save
But to look back in frown. Stand, stand!" These three,
Three thousand confident, in act as many--
For three performers are the file when all
The rest do nothing--with this word "Stand, stand,"
Accommodated by the place, more charming
With their own nobleness, which could have turned
A distaff to a lance, gilded pale looks,
Part shame, part spirit renewed; that some, turned
coward
But by example--O, a sin in war,
Damned in the first beginners!--gan to look
The way that they did and to grin like lions
Upon the pikes o' th' hunters. Then began
A stop i' th' chaser, a retire; anon
A rout, confusion thick. Forthwith they fly
Chickens the way which they stooped eagles; slaves
The strides they victors made; and now our
cowards,
Like fragments in hard voyages, became
The life o' th' need. Having found the backdoor open
Of the unguarded hearts, heavens, how they wound!
Some slain before, some dying, some their friends
O'erborne i' th' former wave, ten chased by one,
Are now each one the slaughterman of twenty.
Those that would die or ere resist are grown
The mortal bugs o' th' field.

LORD  This was strange chance:
A narrow lane, an old man, and two boys.

POSTHUMUS
Nay, do not wonder at it. You are made
Rather to wonder at the things you hear
Than to work any. Will you rhyme upon 't
And vent it for a mock'ry? Here is one:
"Two boys, an old man twice a boy, a lane,
Preserved the Britons, was the Romans' bane."

LORD
Nay, be not angry, sir.

POSTHUMUS  'Lack, to what end?
Who dares not stand his foe, I'll be his friend;
For if he'll do as he is made to do,
I know he'll quickly fly my friendship too.
You have put me into rhyme.

LORD  Farewell. You're angry.
[He exits.]

POSTHUMUS
Still going? This is a lord! O noble misery,
To be i' th' field and ask "What news?" of me!
Today how many would have given their honors
To have saved their carcasses, took heel to do 't,
And yet died too! I, in mine own woe charmed,
Could not find Death where I did hear him groan,
